

Politics, academia, and social status are all zero-sum games.
Positive-sum games create positive people. [11]
Increase serotonin in the brain without drugs: Sunlight, exer-
cise, positive thinking, and tryptophan. [11]
CHANGING HABITS:
Pick one thing. Cultivate a desire. Visualize it.
Plan a sustainable path.
Identify needs, triggers, and substitutes.
Tell your friends.
Track meticulously.
Self-discipline is a bridge to a new self-image.
Bake in the new self-image. It’s who you are—now. [11]
First, you know it. Then, you understand it. Then, you can
explain it. Then, you can feel it. Finally, you are it.
FIND HAPPINESS IN ACCEPTANCE
In any situation in life, you always have three choices: you can
change it, you can accept it, or you can leave it.
If you want to change it, then it is a desire. It will cause you
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 151

NEW PAGE

suffering until you successfully change it. So don’t pick too
many of those. Pick one big desire in your life at any given time
to give yourself purpose and motivation.
Why not two?
You’ll be distracted.
Even one is hard enough. Being peaceful comes from having
your mind clear of thoughts. And a lot of clarity comes from
being in the present moment. It’s very hard to be in the present
moment if you’re thinking, “I need to do this. I want that. This
has got to change.” [8]
You always have three options: you can change it, you can
accept it, or you can leave it. What is not a good option is to
sit around wishing you would change it but not changing it,
wishing you could leave it but not leaving it and not accept-
ing it. That struggle or aversion is responsible for most of our
misery. The phrase I probably use the most to myself in my
head is just one word: “accept.” [5]
What does acceptance look like to you?
It’s to be okay whatever the outcome is. It’s to be balanced and
centered. It’s to step back and to see the grander scheme of things.
We don’t always get what we want, but sometimes what is hap-
pening is for the best. The sooner you can accept it as a reality,
the sooner you can adapt to it.
Achieving acceptance is very difficult. I have a couple of hacks
I try, but I wouldn’t say they are totally successful.
152 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

One hack is stepping back and looking at previous bits of
suffering I’ve had in my life. I write them down. “Last time
you broke up with somebody, last time you had a business
failure, last time you had a health issue, what happened?” I
can trace the growth and improvement that came from it
years later.
I have another hack I use for minor annoyances. When they
happen, a part of me will instantly react negatively. But I’ve
learned to mentally ask myself, “What is the positive of this
situation?”
“Okay, I’ll be late for a meeting. But what is the benefit to me?
I get to relax and watch the birds for a moment. I’ll also spend
less time in that boring meeting.” There’s almost always some-
thing positive.
Even if you can’t come up with something positive, you can say,
“Well, the Universe is going to teach me something now. Now
I get to listen and learn.”
To give you the simplest example: I was at an event and after-
ward, someone flooded my inbox with a whole bunch of photos
they took.
There was a tiny instant judgment saying, “Come on, couldn’t
you have just selected a few of the best? Who sends a hun-
dred photos?” But then immediately I asked myself, “What is
the positive?” The positive is that I get to pick my five favorite
photos. I get to use my judgment.
Over the last year, by practicing this hack enough, I’ve managed
to go from taking a couple of seconds to think of a response, to
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 153

