

now my brain doing it almost instantaneously. That’s a habit
you can train yourself to do. [8]
How do you learn to accept things you can’t change?
Fundamentally, it boils down to one big hack: embracing death.
Death is the most important thing that is ever going to happen
to you. When you look at your death and you acknowledge it,
rather than running away from it, it’ll bring great meaning to
your life. We spend so much of our life trying to avoid death.
So much of what we struggle for can be classified as a quest
for immortality.
If you’re religious and believe there is an afterlife, then you’ll
be taken care of. If you’re not religious, maybe you’ll have kids.
If you’re an artist, a painter, or a businessman, you want to
leave a legacy behind.
Here’s a hot tip: There is no legacy. There’s nothing to leave.
We’re all going to be gone. Our children will be gone. Our works
will be dust. Our civilizations will be dust. Our planet will be
dust. Our solar system will be dust. In the grand scheme of
things, the Universe has been around for ten billion years. It’ll
be around for another ten billion years.
Your life is a firefly blink in a night. You’re here for such a brief
period of time. If you fully acknowledge the futility of what
you’re doing, then I think it can bring great happiness and
peace because you realize this is a game. But it’s a fun game. All
that matters is you experience your reality as you go through
life. Why not interpret it in the most positive possible way?
154 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Any moment where you’re not having a great time, when you’re
not really happy, you’re not doing anyone any favors. It’s not
like your unhappiness makes them better off somehow. All
you’re doing is wasting this incredibly small and precious time
you have on this Earth. Keeping death on the forefront and not
denying it is very important.
Whenever I get caught up in my ego battles, I just think of
entire civilizations that have come and gone. For example, take
the Sumerians. I’m sure they were important people and did
great things, but go ahead and name me a single Sumerian.
Tell me anything interesting or important Sumerians did that
lasted. Nothing.
So maybe ten thousand years from now or a hundred thou-
sand years from now, people will say, “Oh yeah, Americans.
I’ve heard of Americans.” [8]
You’re going to die one day, and none of this is going to matter.
So enjoy yourself. Do something positive. Project some love.
Make someone happy. Laugh a little bit. Appreciate the
moment. And do your work. [8]
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 155

NEW PAGE

EASY LIFE.
CH ASY
OI E
CES,
S,
CE
OI H
H A
C R
HARD D LIFE.
156 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

