

The mind itself is a muscle—it can be trained and condi-
tioned. It has been haphazardly conditioned by society to be
out of our control. If you look at your mind with awareness
and intent (a 24/7 job you’re working at every moment) I think
you can unpack your own mind, your emotions, thoughts, and
reactions. Then you can start reconfiguring. You can start
rewriting this program to what you want. [4]
Meditation is turning off society and listening to yourself.
It only “works” when done for its own sake.
Hiking is walking meditation.
Journaling is writing meditation.
Praying is gratitude meditation.
Showering is accidental meditation.
Sitting quietly is direct meditation.
CHOOSING TO BUILD YOURSELF
The greatest superpower is the ability to change yourself.
What’s the biggest mistake you’ve made in your life and how
did you recover?
178 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

I’ve made a class of mistakes I would summarize the same way.
The mistakes were obvious only in hindsight through one exer-
cise, which is asking yourself: when you’re thirty, what advice
would you give your twenty-year-old self? And when you’re
forty, what advice would you give your thirty-year-old self?
(Maybe if you’re younger, you can do it by every five years.)
Sit down and say, “Okay, 2007, what was I doing? How was I
feeling? 2008, what was I doing? How was I feeling? 2009, what
was I doing? How was I feeling?”
Life is going to play out the way it’s going to play out. There
will be some good and some bad. Most of it is actually just up
to your interpretation. You’re born, you have a set of sensory
experiences, and then you die. How you choose to interpret
those experiences is up to you, and different people interpret
them in different ways.
Really, I wish I had done all of the same things, but with less
emotion and less anger. The most celebrated example would
be when I was younger, I started a company. This company did
well, but I didn’t do well, so I sued some of the people involved.
It was a good outcome for me in the end, and everything
worked out okay, but there was a lot of angst and a lot of anger.
Today, I wouldn’t have the angst and the anger. I would have
just walked up to the people and said, “Look, this is what hap-
pened. This is what I’m going to do. This is how I’m going to
do it. This is what’s fair. This is what’s not.”
I would have realized the anger and emotions are a huge, com-
pletely unnecessary consequence. Now, I’m trying to learn
from that and do the same things I think are the right things
to do but without anger and with a very long-term point of
SAVING YOURSELF · 179

NEW PAGE

view. If you take a very long-term point of view and take the
emotion out of it, I wouldn’t consider those things mistakes
anymore. [4]
Again, habits are everything—everything we are. We are
trained in habits from when we are children, including potty
training, when to cry and when not to, how to smile and when
not to. These things become habits—behaviors we learn and
integrate into ourselves.
When we’re older, we’re a collection of thousands of habits
constantly running subconsciously. We have a little bit of extra
brainpower in our neocortex for solving new problems. You
become your habits.
This came to light for me when my trainer gave me a routine
to do every single day. I had never worked out every single day
before. It’s a light workout. It’s not tough on your body, but
I did this workout every single day. I realized the incredible,
astonishing transformation it had on me both physically and
mentally.
To have peace of mind, you have to have peace of body first.
This taught me the power of habits. I started realizing it’s all
about habits. At any given time, I’m either trying to pick up a
good habit or discard a previous bad habit. It takes time.
If someone says, “I want to be fit, I want to be healthy. Right
now, I’m out of shape and I’m fat.” Well, nothing sustainable is
going to work for you in three months. It’s going to be at least
180 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

