

communicating, it can mean recruiting, it can mean raising
money, it can mean inspiring people, it could mean doing PR.
It’s a broad umbrella category. [78]
Earn with your mind, not your time.
Let’s talk more about the real estate business. The worst kind
of job is someone who’s doing labor to repair a house. Maybe
you get paid ten dollars or twenty dollars an hour. You go to
people’s houses, your boss demands you’re there at 8:00 a.m.,
and you repair your piece of the house. Here, you have zero
leverage. You have some accountability, but not really, because
your accountability is to your boss, not to the client. You don’t
have any real specific knowledge, since what you’re doing is
labor lots of people can do. You’re not going to get paid a lot.
You’re getting paid minimum wage plus a little bit for your skill
and your time.
The next level up might be the general contractor working on
the house for the owner. They may be getting paid $50,000
to do the whole project, then they’re paying the labor fifteen
dollars an hour and they’re keeping the difference.
A general contractor is obviously a better place to be. But
how do we measure it? How do we know it’s better? Well, we
know it’s better because this person has some accountabil-
ity. They’re responsible for the outcome, they have to sweat
at night if things aren’t working. Contractors have leverage
through laborers working for them. They also have little bit
more specific knowledge: how to organize a team, make them
show up on time, and how to deal with city regulations.
64 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

The next level up might be a real estate developer. A developer
is someone who’s going to buy a property, hire a bunch of con-
tractors, and transform it into something higher value. They
probably have to take out a loan to buy a house or go to investors
to raise money. They buy the old house, tear it down, rebuild
it, and sell it. Instead of $50,000 like the general contractor, or
fifteen dollars an hour like the laborer, the developer might
be able to make a million dollars or half a million dollars in
profit when they sell the house for more than they bought it for,
including the expenses of construction. But now, notice what is
required from the developer: a very high level of accountability.
The developer takes on more risk, more accountability, has
more leverage, and needs to have more specific knowledge.
They need to understand fundraising, city regulations, where
the real estate market is headed, and whether they should take
the risk or not. It is more difficult.
The next level up might be someone who’s managing money in
a real estate fund. They have an enormous amount of capital
leverage. They’re dealing with lots and lots of developers, and
they’re buying huge amounts of housing inventory. [74]
One level beyond that might be somebody who says, “Actually,
I want to bring the maximum leverage to bear in this market
and the maximum specific knowledge.” That person would say,
“Well, I understand real estate, and I understand everything
from basic housing construction, to building properties and
selling them, to how real estate markets move and thrive, and I
also understand the technology business. I understand how to
recruit developers, how to write code, and how to build a good
product, and I understand how to raise money from venture
capitalists, how to return it, and how all of that works.”
BUILDING WEALTH · 65

NEW PAGE

Obviously, not a single person may know this. You may pull
a team together to do it where each have different skill sets,
but that combined entity would have specific knowledge in
technology and in real estate. It would have massive account-
ability because that company’s name would be a very high-risk,
high-reward effort attached to the whole thing, and people
would devote their lives to it and take on significant risk. It
would have leverage in code with lots of developers. It would
have capital with investors putting money in and the founder’s
own capital. It would have some of the highest-quality labor
you can find, which is high-quality engineers, designers, and
marketers who are working on the company.
Then, you may end up with a Trulia, Redfin, or Zillow company,
and then the upside could potentially be in the billions of dol-
lars, or the hundreds of millions of dollars. [78]
Each level has increasing leverage, increasing accountability,
increasingly specific knowledge. You’re adding in money-
based leverage on top of labor-based leverage. Adding in
code-based leverage on top of money and labor allows you to
actually create something bigger and bigger and get closer and
closer to owning all the upside, not just being paid a salary.
You start as a salaried employee. But you want to work your way
up to try and get higher leverage, more accountability, and spe-
cific knowledge. The combination of those over a long period
of time with the magic of compound interest will make you
wealthy. [74]
The one thing you have to avoid is the risk of ruin.
Avoiding ruin means stay out of jail. So, don’t do anything ille-
66 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

