

The first rule of handling conflict is: Don’t hang around people
who constantly engage in conflict. I’m not interested in any-
thing unsustainable or even hard to sustain, including difficult
relationships. [5]
If you can’t see yourself working with someone for life, don’t
work with them for a day.
There’s a friend of mine, a Persian guy named Behzad. He just
loves life, and he has no time for anybody who is not happy.
If you ask Behzad what’s his secret? He’ll just look up and say,
“Stop asking why and start saying wow.” The world is such an
amazing place. As humans, we’re used to taking everything for
granted. Like what you and I are doing right now. We’re sitting
indoors, wearing clothes, well-fed, and communicating with
each other through space and time. We should be two monkeys
sitting in the jungle right now watching the sun going down,
asking ourselves where we are going to sleep.
When we get something, we assume the world owes it to us.
If you’re present, you’ll realize how many gifts and how much
abundance there is around us at all times. That’s all you really
need to do. I’m here now, and I have all these incredible things
at my disposal. [8]
The most important trick to being happy is to realize happi-
ness is a skill you develop and a choice you make. You choose to
be happy, and then you work at it. It’s just like building muscles.
It’s just like losing weight. It’s just like succeeding at your job.
It’s just like learning calculus.
148 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

You decide it’s important to you. You prioritize it above every-
thing else. You read everything on the topic. [7]
HAPPINESS HABITS
I have a series of tricks I use to try and be happier in the
moment. At first, they were silly and difficult and required a
lot of attention, but now some of them have become second
nature. By doing them religiously, I’ve managed to increase my
happiness level quite a bit.
The obvious one is meditation—insight meditation. Working
toward a specific purpose on it, which is to try and understand
how my mind works. [7]
Just being very aware in every moment. If I catch myself judg-
ing somebody, I can stop myself and say, “What’s the positive
interpretation of this?” I used to get annoyed about things.
Now I always look for the positive side of it. It used to take a
rational effort. It used to take a few seconds for me to come up
with a positive. Now I can do it sub-second. [7]
I try to get more sunlight on my skin. I look up and smile. [7]
Every time you catch yourself desiring something, say, “Is it so
important to me I’ll be unhappy unless this goes my way?” You’re
going to find with the vast majority of things it’s just not true. [7]
I think dropping caffeine made me happier. It makes me more
of a stable person. [7]
I think working out every day made me happier. If you have
peace of body, it’s easier to have peace of mind. [7]
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 149

NEW PAGE

The more you judge, the more you separate yourself. You’ll
feel good for an instant, because you feel good about yourself,
thinking you’re better than someone. Later, you’re going to
feel lonely. Then, you see negativity everywhere. The world
just reflects your own feelings back at you. [77]
Tell your friends you’re a happy person. Then, you’ll be forced
to conform to it. You’ll have a consistency bias. You have to live
up to it. Your friends will expect you to be a happy person. [5]
Recover time and happiness by minimizing your use of these
three smartphone apps: phone, calendar, and alarm clock. [11]
The more secrets you have, the less happy you’re going to
be. [11]
Caught in a funk? Use meditation, music, and exercise to reset
your mood. Then choose a new path to commit emotional
energy for rest of day. [11]
Hedonic adaptation is more powerful for man-made things
(cars, houses, clothes, money) than for natural things (food,
sex, exercise). [11]
No exceptions—all screen activities linked to less happiness,
all non-screen activities linked to more happiness. [11]
A personal metric: how much of the day is spent doing things
out of obligation rather than out of interest? [11]
It’s the news’ job to make you anxious and angry. But its under-
lying scientific, economic, education, and conflict trends are
positive. Stay optimistic. [11]
150 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

