

have enough of a worldview and understanding that you won’t
fear any book. Then you can just learn. If you’re a perpetual
learning machine, you will never be out of options for how to
make money. You can always see what’s coming up in society,
what the value is, where the demand is, and you can learn to
come up to speed. [74]
To think clearly, understand the basics. If you’re memorizing
advanced concepts without being able to re-derive them as
needed, you’re lost.
We’re now in a day and age of Twitter and Facebook. We’re getting
bite-sized, pithy wisdom, which is really hard to absorb. Books
are very difficult to read as a modern person because we’ve been
trained. We have two contradictory pieces of training:
One is our attention span has gone through the floor because
we’re hit with so much information all the time. We want to
skip, summarize, and cut to the chase.
Twitter has made me a worse reader but a much better writer.
On the other hand, we’re also taught from a young age to finish
your books. Books are sacred—when you go to school and
you’re assigned to read a book, you have to finish the book.
Over time, we forget how to read books. Everyone I know is
stuck on some book.
I’m sure you’re stuck on something right now—it’s page 332,
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 121

NEW PAGE

you can’t go any further, but you know you should finish the
book. So what do you do? You give up reading books for a while.
For me, giving up reading was a tragedy. I grew up on books,
then I switched to blogs, then I switched to Twitter and Face-
book, and I realized I wasn’t actually learning anything. I was
just taking little dopamine snacks all day long. I was getting
my little 140-character burst of dopamine. I would Tweet, then
look to see who retweeted my Tweet. It’s a fun and wonderful
thing, but it’s a game I was playing.
I realized I had to go back to reading books. [6]
I knew it was a very hard problem because my brain had now
been trained to spend time on Facebook, Twitter, and these
other bite-sized pieces.
I came up with this hack where I started treating books as
throwaway blog posts or bite-sized tweets or posts. I felt no
obligation to finish any book. Now, when someone mentions a
book to me, I buy it. At any given time, I’m reading somewhere
between ten and twenty books. I’m flipping through them.
If the book is getting a little boring, I’ll skip ahead. Sometimes,
I start reading a book in the middle because some paragraph
caught my eye. I’ll just continue from there, and I feel no obli-
gation whatsoever to finish the book. All of a sudden, books
are back into my reading library. That’s great, because there
is ancient wisdom in books. [6]
When solving problems: the older the problem, the older the
solution.
122 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

If you’re trying to learn how to drive a car or fly a plane, you
should read something written in the modern age because
this problem was created in the modern age and the solution
is great in the modern age.
If you’re talking about an old problem like how to keep your
body healthy, how to stay calm and peaceful, what kinds of
value systems are good, how you raise a family, and those kinds
of things, the older solutions are probably better.
Any book that survived for two thousand years has been fil-
tered through many people. The general principles are more
likely to be correct. I wanted to get back into reading these
sorts of books. [6]
You know that song you can’t get out of your head? All
thoughts work that way. Careful what you read.
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 123

