

on the opportunity, you can do so with leverage—the maxi-
mum leverage possible. [1]
There are three broad classes of leverage:
One form of leverage is labor—other humans working for you.
It is the oldest form of leverage, and actually not a great one in
the modern world. [1] I would argue this is the worst form of
leverage that you could possibly use. Managing other people
is incredibly messy. It requires tremendous leadership skills.
You’re one short hop from a mutiny or getting eaten or torn
apart by the mob. [78]
Money is good as a form of leverage. It means every time you
make a decision, you multiply it with money. [1] Capital is a
trickier form of leverage to use. It’s more modern. It’s the one
that people have used to get fabulously wealthy in the last cen-
tury. It’s probably been the dominant form of leverage in the
last century.
You can see this by looking for the richest people. It’s bankers,
politicians in corrupt countries who print money, essentially
people who move large amounts of money around. If you
look at the top of very large companies, outside of technology
companies, in many, many large old companies, the CEO job
is really a financial job.
It scales very, very well. If you get good at managing capital, you
can manage more and more capital much more easily than you
can manage more and more people. [78]
The final form of leverage is brand new—the most democratic
form. It is: “products with no marginal cost of replication.”
58 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

This includes books, media, movies, and code. Code is probably
the most powerful form of permissionless leverage. All you
need is a computer—you don’t need anyone’s permission. [1]
Forget rich versus poor, white-collar versus blue. It’s now
leveraged versus un-leveraged.
The most interesting and the most important form of leverage
is the idea of products that have no marginal cost of replication.
This is the new form of leverage. This was only invented in the
last few hundred years. It started with the printing press. It
accelerated with broadcast media, and now it’s really blown up
with the internet and with coding. Now, you can multiply your
efforts without involving other humans and without needing
money from other humans.
This book is a form of leverage. Long ago, I would have had to
sit in a lecture hall and lecture each of you personally. I would
have maybe reached a few hundred people, and that would
have been that. [78]
This newest form of leverage is where all the new fortunes are
made, all the new billionaires. For the last generation, fortunes
were made by capital. The people who made fortunes were the
Warren Buffetts of the world.
But the new generation’s fortunes are all made through code
or media. Joe Rogan making $50 million to $100 million a year
from his podcast. You’re going to have PewDiePie. I don’t know
how much money he’s rolling in, but he’s bigger than the news.
And of course, there’s Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, Larry Page,
BUILDING WEALTH · 59

NEW PAGE

Sergey Brin, Bill Gates, and Steve Jobs. Their wealth is all code-
based leverage. [78]
Probably the most interesting thing to keep in mind about
new forms of leverage is they are permissionless. They don’t
require somebody else’s permission for you to use them or
succeed. For labor leverage, somebody has to decide to follow
you. For capital leverage, somebody has to give you money to
invest or to turn into a product.
Coding, writing books, recording podcasts, tweeting, You-
Tubing—these kinds of things are permissionless. You don’t
need anyone’s permission to do them, and that’s why they
are very egalitarian. They’re great equalizers of leverage. [78]
Every great software developer, for example, now has an
army of robots working for him at nighttime while he or
she sleeps, after they’ve written the code, and it’s cranking
away. [78]
You’re never going to get rich renting out your time.
Whenever you can in life, optimize for independence rather
than pay. If you have independence and you’re accountable on
your output, as opposed to your input—that’s the dream. [10]
Humans evolved in societies where there was no leverage. If I
was chopping wood or carrying water for you, you knew eight
hours put in would be equal to about eight hours of output.
Now we’ve invented leverage—through capital, cooperation,
technology, productivity, all these means. We live in an age of
leverage. As a worker, you want to be as leveraged as possible
60 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

