

The business world has many people playing zero sum
games and a few playing positive sum games searching for
each other in the crowd.
There are fundamentally two huge games in life that people
play. One is the money game. Because money is not going to
solve all of your problems, but it’s going to solve all of your
money problems. People realize that, so they want to make
money.
But at the same time, many of them, deep down, believe they
can’t make money. They don’t want any wealth creation to
happen. So, they attack the whole enterprise by saying, “Well,
making money is evil. You shouldn’t do it.”
But they’re actually playing the other game, which is the
status game. They’re trying to be high status in the eyes of
other people watching by saying, “Well, I don’t need money.
We don’t want money.” Status is your ranking in the social
hierarchy. [78]
Wealth creation is an evolutionarily recent positive-sum
game. Status is an old zero-sum game. Those attacking
wealth creation are often just seeking status.
Status is a zero-sum game. It’s a very old game. We’ve been
playing it since monkey tribes. It’s hierarchical. Who’s number
one? Who’s number two? Who’s number three? And for
number three to move to number two, number two has to
move out of that slot. So, status is a zero-sum game.
BUILDING WEALTH · 73

NEW PAGE

Politics is an example of a status game. Even sports are an
example of a status game. To be the winner, there must be a
loser. I don’t fundamentally love status games. They play an
important role in our society, so we can figure out who’s in
charge. But fundamentally, you play them because they’re a
necessary evil. [78]
The problem is, to win at a status game, you have to put some-
body else down. That’s why you should avoid status games in
your life—they make you into an angry, combative person.
You’re always fighting to put other people down, to put your-
self and the people you like up.
Status games are always going to exist. There’s no way around
it, but realize most of the time, when you’re trying to create
wealth and you’re getting attacked by someone else, they’re
trying to increase their own status at your expense. They’re
playing a different game. And it’s a worse game. It’s a zero-sum
game instead of a positive-sum game. [78]
Play stupid games, win stupid prizes.
What is the most important thing to do for younger people
starting out?
Spend more time making the big decisions. There are basically
three really big decisions you make in your early life: where
you live, who you’re with, and what you do.
We spend very little time deciding which relationship to get
into. We spend so much time in a job, but we spend so little
74 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

time deciding which job to get into. Choosing what city to live in
can almost completely determine the trajectory of your life, but
we spend so little time trying to figure out what city to live in.
Advice to a young engineer considering moving to San
Francisco: “Do you want to leave your friends behind? Or be
the one left behind?”
If you’re going to live in a city for ten years, if you’re going to
be in a job for five years, if you’re in a relationship for a decade,
you should be spending one to two years deciding these things.
These are highly dominating decisions. Those three decisions
really matter.
You have to say no to everything and free up your time so you
can solve the important problems. Those three are probably
the three biggest ones. [1]
What are one or two steps you’d take to surround yourself
with successful people?
Figure out what you’re good at, and start helping other people
with it. Give it away. Pay it forward. Karma works because
people are consistent. On a long enough timescale, you will
attract what you project. But don’t measure—your patience
will run out if you count. [7]
An old boss once warned: “You’ll never be rich since you’re
obviously smart, and someone will always offer you a job
that’s just good enough.”
BUILDING WEALTH · 75

