

man’s troubles arise because he cannot sit in a room quietly by
himself.” If you could just sit for thirty minutes and be happy,
you are successful. That is a very powerful place to be, but very
few of us get there. [6]
I think of happiness as an emergent property of peace. If you’re
peaceful inside and out, that will eventually result in happi-
ness. But peace is a very hard thing to come by. The irony is the
way most of us try to find peace is through war. When you start
a business, in a way, you’re going to war. When you struggle
with your roommates as to who should clean the dishes, you’re
going to war. You’re struggling so you can have some sense of
security and peace later.
In reality, peace is not a guarantee. It’s always flowing. It’s
always changing. You want to learn the core skill set of flowing
with life and accepting it in most cases. [8]
You can get almost anything you want out of life, as long as
it’s one thing and you want it far more than anything else.
In my own personal experience, the place I end up the most is
wanting to be at peace.
Peace is happiness at rest, and happiness is peace in motion.
You can convert peace into happiness anytime you want. But
peace is what you want most of the time. If you’re a peaceful
person, anything you do will be a happy activity.
Today, the way we think you get peace is by resolving all your
external problems. But there are unlimited external problems.
142 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

The only way to actually get peace on the inside is by giving up
this idea of problems. [77]
ENVY IS THE ENEMY OF HAPPINESS
I don’t think life is that hard. I think we make it hard. One of
the things I’m trying to get rid of is the word “should.” When-
ever the word “should” creeps up in your mind, it’s guilt or
social programming. Doing something because you “should”
basically means you don’t actually want to do it. It’s just making
you miserable, so I’m trying to eliminate as many “shoulds”
from my life as possible. [1]
The enemy of peace of mind is expectations drilled into you
by society and other people.
Socially, we’re told, “Go work out. Go look good.” That’s a multi-
player competitive game. Other people can see if I’m doing
a good job or not. We’re told, “Go make money. Go buy a big
house.” Again, external multiplayer competitive game. Train-
ing yourself to be happy is completely internal. There is no
external progress, no external validation. You’re competing
against yourself—it is a single-player game.
We’re like bees or ants. We are such social creatures, we’re
externally programmed and driven. We don’t know how to
play and win these single-player games anymore. We compete
purely in multiplayer games.
The reality is life is a single-player game. You’re born alone.
You’re going to die alone. All of your interpretations are alone.
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 143

NEW PAGE

All your memories are alone. You’re gone in three generations,
and nobody cares. Before you showed up, nobody cared. It’s
all single player.
Perhaps one reason why yoga and meditation are hard to
sustain is they have no extrinsic value. Purely single-player
games.
Buffett has a great example when he asks if you want to be
the world’s best lover and known as the worst, or the world’s
worst lover and known as the best? [paraphrased] in refer-
ence to an inner or external scorecard.
Exactly right. All the real scorecards are internal.
Jealousy was a very hard emotion for me to overcome. When I
was young, I had a lot of jealousy. By and by, I learned to get rid
of it. It still crops up every now and then. It’s such a poisonous
emotion because, at the end of the day, you’re no better off with
jealousy. You’re unhappier, and the person you’re jealous of is
still successful or good-looking or whatever they are.
One day, I realized with all these people I was jealous of, I
couldn’t just choose little aspects of their life. I couldn’t say I
want his body, I want her money, I want his personality. You
have to be that person. Do you want to actually be that person
with all of their reactions, their desires, their family, their hap-
piness level, their outlook on life, their self-image? If you’re not
willing to do a wholesale, 24/7, 100 percent swap with who that
person is, then there is no point in being jealous.
144 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

