

A rational person can find peace by cultivating indifference
to things outside of their control.
I have lowered my identity.
I have lowered the chattering of my mind.
I don’t care about things that don’t really matter.
I don’t get involved in politics.
I don’t hang around unhappy people.
I really value my time on this earth.
I read philosophy.
I meditate.
I hang around with happy people.
And it works.
You can very slowly but steadily and methodically improve your
happiness baseline, just like you can improve your fitness. [10]
HAPPINESS IS A CHOICE
Happiness, love, and passion…aren’t things you find—they’re
choices you make.
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 133

NEW PAGE

Happiness is a choice you make and a skill you develop.
The mind is just as malleable as the body. We spend so much
time and effort trying to change the external world, other
people, and our own bodies—all while accepting ourselves
the way we were programmed in our youths.
We accept the voice in our head as the source of all truth. But
all of it is malleable, and every day is new. Memory and identity
are burdens from the past preventing us from living freely in
the present. [3]
HAPPINESS REQUIRES PRESENCE
At any given time, when you’re walking down the streets, a very
small percentage of your brain is focused on the present. The
rest is planning the future or regretting the past. This keeps
you from having an incredible experience. It’s keeping you
from seeing the beauty in everything and for being grateful
for where you are. You can literally destroy your happiness if
you spend all of your time living in delusions of the future. [4]
We crave experiences that will make us be present, but the
cravings themselves take us from the present moment.
I just don’t believe in anything from my past. Anything. No
memories. No regrets. No people. No trips. Nothing. A lot of
our unhappiness comes from comparing things from the past
to the present. [4]
134 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Anticipation for our vices pulls us into the future. Eliminating
vices makes it easier to be present.
There’s a great definition I read: “Enlightenment is the space
between your thoughts.” It means enlightenment isn’t some-
thing you achieve after thirty years sitting on a mountaintop.
It’s something you can achieve moment to moment, and you
can be enlightened to a certain percent every single day. [5]
What if this life is the paradise we were promised, and we’re
just squandering it?
HAPPINESS REQUIRES PEACE
Are happiness and purpose interconnected?
Happiness is such an overloaded word, I’m not even sure what
it means. For me these days, happiness is more about peace
than it is about joy. I don’t think peace and purpose go together.
If it’s your internal purpose, the thing you most want to do,
then sure, you’ll be happy doing it. But an externally inflicted
purpose, like “society wants me to do X,” “I am the first son of
the first son of this, so I should do Y,” or “I have this debt or
burden I took on,” I don’t think it will make you happy.
I think a lot of us have this low-level pervasive feeling of anx-
iety. If you pay attention to your mind, sometimes you’re just
running around doing your thing and you’re not feeling great,
and you notice your mind is chattering and chattering about
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 135

