

and you suffer because you’ve been putting off reality. You’ve
been hiding it from yourself.
The good news is, the moment of suffering—when you’re in
pain—is a moment of truth. It is a moment where you’re forced
to embrace reality the way it actually is. Then, you can make
meaningful change and progress. You can only make progress
when you’re starting with the truth.
The hard thing is seeing the truth. To see the truth, you have
to get your ego out of the way because your ego doesn’t want
to face the truth. The smaller you can make your ego, the less
conditioned you can make your reactions, the less desires you
can have about the outcome you want, the easier it will be to
see the reality.
What we wish to be true clouds our perception of what is true.
Suffering is the moment when we can no longer deny reality.
Imagine we’re going through something difficult like a breakup,
a job loss, a business failure, or a health problem, and our
friends are advising us. When we’re advising them, the answer
is obvious. It comes to us in a minute, and we tell them exactly,
“Oh that girl, get over her, she wasn’t good for you anyway. You’ll
be happier. Trust me. You’ll find someone.”
You know the correct answer, but your friend can’t see it,
because they’re in the moment of suffering and pain. They’re
still wishing reality was different. The problem isn’t reality.
The problem is their desire is colliding with reality and pre-
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 97

NEW PAGE

venting them from seeing the truth, no matter how much you
say it. The same thing happens when I make decisions.
The more desire I have for something to work out a certain way,
the less likely I am to see the truth. Especially in business, if
something isn’t going well, I try to acknowledge it publicly and
I try to acknowledge it publicly in front of my co-founders and
friends and co-workers. Then, I’m not hiding it from anybody
else. If I’m not hiding it from anybody, I’m not going to delude
myself from what’s actually going on. [4]
What you feel tells you nothing about the facts—it merely tells
you something about your estimate of the facts.
It’s actually really important to have empty space. If you don’t
have a day or two every week in your calendar where you’re
not always in meetings, and you’re not always busy, then you’re
not going to be able to think.
You’re not going to be able to have good ideas for your busi-
ness. You’re not going to be able to make good judgments. I
also encourage taking at least one day a week (preferably two,
because if you budget two, you’ll end up with one) where you
just have time to think.
It’s only after you’re bored you have the great ideas. It’s never
going to be when you’re stressed, or busy, running around or
rushed. Make the time. [7]
98 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Very smart people tend to be weird since they insist on
thinking everything through for themselves.
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 99

