

It seems really difficult to follow. It makes sense for the brain
and the body to have a backup mechanism. For example, in
the Ice Ages, humans evolved without many plants available.
At the same time, we have been eating plants for thousands
of years…I don’t think plants are bad for you, but something
closer to the paleo diet is probably correct.
I think the interplay between sugar and fat is really interesting.
Fat is what makes you satiated. Fatty foods make you feel full.
The easiest way to feel full is to go on a ketogenic diet, where
you’re eating tons of bacon all the time, and you’re going to feel
almost nauseous and not want to look at fat anymore.
Sugar makes you hungry. Sugar signals to your body, “There’s
this incredible food resource in the environment we’re not
evolved for,” so you rush out to get sugar. The problem is the
sugar effect dominates the fat effect. If you eat a fatty meal and
you throw some sugar in, the sugar is going to deliver hunger
and fat is going to deliver the calories and you’re just going
to binge. That’s why all desserts are large combinations of fat
and carbs together.
In nature, it’s very rare to find carbs and fat together. In nature,
I find carbs and fat together in coconuts, in mangoes, maybe
in bananas, but it’s basically tropical fruits. The combination
of sugar and fat together is really deadly. You’ve got to watch
out for that in your diet.
I’m not an expert, and the problem is diet and nutrition are like
politics: everybody thinks they’re an expert. Their identity is
wrapped up in it because what they’ve been eating or what they
think they should be eating is obviously the correct answer.
Everybody has a little religion—it’s just a really difficult topic
SAVING YOURSELF · 163

NEW PAGE

to talk about. I will just say in general, any sensible diet avoids
the combination of sugar and fat together. [2]
Dietary fat drives satiety. Dietary sugar drives hunger. The
sugar effect dominates. Control your appetite accordingly.
Most fit and healthy people focus much more on what they eat
than how much. Quality control is easier than (and leads to)
quantity control. [11]
Ironically, fasting (from a low-carb/paleo base) is easier than
portion control. Once the body detects food, it overrides the
brain. [11]
What I wonder about Wonder Bread is how it can stay soft at
room temperature for months. If bacteria won’t eat it, should
you? [11]
It has been five thousand years, and we’re still arguing over
whether meat is poisonous or plants are poisonous. Ditch
the extremists and any food invented in the last few hundred
years. [11]
When it comes to medicine and nutrition, subtract before you
add. [11]
My trainer sends me photos of his meals, and it reminds me
we are all flavor addicts. [11]
164 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

World’s simplest diet: The more processed the food, the less
one should consume.
EXERCISE
The harder the workout, the easier the day.
What habit would you say most positively impacts your life?
The daily morning workout. That has been a complete game-
changer. It’s made me feel healthier, younger. It’s made me not
go out late. It came from one simple thing, which is everybody
says, “I don’t have time.” Basically, whenever you throw any
so-called good habit at somebody, they’ll have an excuse for
themselves. Usually the most common is “I don’t have time.”
“I don’t have time” is just another way of saying “It’s not a pri-
ority.” What you really have to do is say whether it is a priority
or not. If something is your number one priority, then you will
do it. That’s just the way life works. If you’ve got a fuzzy basket
of ten or fifteen different priorities, you’re going to end up
getting none of them.
What I did was decide my number one priority in life, above
my happiness, above my family, above my work, is my own
health. It starts with my physical health. [4] Because my physi-
cal health became my number one priority, then I could never
say I don’t have time. In the morning, I work out, and however
long it takes is how long it takes. I do not start my day until I’ve
worked out. I don’t care if the world is imploding and melt-
SAVING YOURSELF · 165

