

One thing I’ve learned recently: it’s way more important to per-
fect your desires than to try to do something you don’t 100
percent desire. [1]
When you’re young and healthy, you can do more. By doing
more, you’re actually taking on more and more desires. You
don’t realize this is slowly destroying your happiness. I find
younger people are less happy but more healthy. Older people
are more happy but less healthy.
When you’re young, you have time. You have health, but you
have no money. When you’re middle-aged, you have money
and you have health, but you have no time. When you’re old,
you have money and you have time, but you have no health. So
the trifecta is trying to get all three at once.
By the time people realize they have enough money, they’ve
lost their time and their health. [8]
SUCCESS DOES NOT EARN HAPPINESS
Happiness is being satisfied with what you have.
Success comes from dissatisfaction. Choose.
Confucius says you have two lives, and the second one begins
when you realize you only have one. When and how did your
second life begin?
That’s a very deep question. Most people who are past a cer-
tain age have had this feeling or phenomenon; they’ve gone
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 139

NEW PAGE

through life a certain way and then gotten to a certain stage
and had to make some pretty big changes. I’m definitely also
in that boat.
I struggled for a lot of my life to have certain material and
social successes. When I achieved those material and social
successes (or at least was beyond a point where they didn’t
matter as much), I realized the people around me who had
achieved similar successes and were on their way to achiev-
ing more didn’t seem all that happy. In my case, there was
definitely hedonic adaptation: I’d very quickly get used to
anything.
This led me to the conclusion, which seems trite, that happi-
ness is internal. That conclusion set me on a path of working
more on my internal self and realizing all real success is inter-
nal and has very little to do with external circumstances.
One has to do the external thing anyway. We’re biologically
hard-wired. It’s glib to say, “You can just turn it off.” Your own
life experience will bring you back to the internal path. [7]
The problem with getting good at a game, especially one
with big rewards, is you continue playing it long after you
should have outgrown it.
Survival and replication drive put us on the work treadmill.
Hedonic adaptation keeps us there. The trick is knowing
when to jump off and play instead.
Who do you think of as successful?
140 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Most people think of someone as successful when they win a
game, whatever game they play themselves. If you’re an athlete,
you’re going to think of a top athlete. If you’re in business, you
might think Elon Musk.
A few years ago, I would have said Steve Jobs, because he was
part of the driving force creating something that changed lives
for all of humanity. I think Marc Andreessen is successful, not
because of his recent incarnation as a venture capitalist, but
because of the incredible work he did with Netscape. Satoshi
Nakamoto is successful in that he created Bitcoin, which is
this incredible technological creation that will have repercus-
sions for decades to come. Of course, Elon Musk, because he
changed everyone’s viewpoint on what is possible with modern
technology and entrepreneurship. I consider those creators
and commercializers successful.
To me, the real winners are the ones who step out of the game
entirely, who don’t even play the game, who rise above it. Those
are the people who have such internal mental and self-control
and self-awareness, they need nothing from anybody else.
There are a couple of these characters I know in my life. Jerzy
Gregorek—I would consider him successful because he doesn’t
need anything from anybody. He’s at peace, he’s healthy, and
whether he makes more money or less money compared to
the next person has no effect on his mental state.
Historically, I would say the legendary Buddha or Krish-
namurti, whose stuff I like reading, they are successful in the
sense that they step out of the game entirely. Winning or losing
does not matter to them.
There’s a line from Blaise Pascal I read. Basically, it says: “All of
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 141

