

technology and large workforces and capital, our decisions
are leveraged more and more.
If you can be more right and more rational, you’re going to
get nonlinear returns in your life. I love the blog Farnam
Street because it really focuses on helping you be more accu-
rate, an overall better decision-maker. Decision-making is
everything. [4]
The more you know, the less you diversify.
COLLECT MENTAL MODELS
During decision-making, the brain is a memory prediction
machine.
A lousy way to do memory prediction is “X happened in the
past, therefore X will happen in the future.” It’s too based on
specific circumstances. What you want is principles. You want
mental models.
The best mental models I have found came through evolution,
game theory, and Charlie Munger. Charlie Munger is Warren
Buffett’s partner. Very good investor. He has tons and tons of
great mental models. Author and trader Nassim Taleb has
great mental models. Benjamin Franklin had great mental
models. I basically load my head full of mental models. [4]
I use my tweets and other people’s tweets as maxims that help
compress my own learnings and recall them. The brain space
is finite—you have finite neurons—so you can almost think
106 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

of these as pointers, addresses, or mnemonics to help you
remember deep-seated principles where you have the under-
lying experience to back it up.
If you don’t have the underlying experience, then it just reads
like a collection of quotes. It’s cool, it’s inspirational for a
moment, maybe you’ll make a nice poster out of it. But then
you forget it and move on. Mental models are really just com-
pact ways for you to recall your own knowledge. [78]
EVOLUTION
I think a lot of modern society can be explained through evo-
lution. One theory is civilization exists to answer the question
of who gets to mate. If you look around, from a purely sexual
selection perspective, sperm is abundant and eggs are scarce.
It’s an allocation problem.
Literally all of the works of mankind and womankind can be
traced down to people trying to solve this problem.
Evolution, thermodynamics, information theory, and com-
plexity have explanatory and predictive power in many aspects
of life. [11]
INVERSION
I don’t believe I have the ability to say what is going to work.
Rather, I try to eliminate what’s not going to work. I think
being successful is just about not making mistakes. It’s not
about having correct judgment. It’s about avoiding incorrect
judgments. [4]
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 107

NEW PAGE

COMPLEXITY THEORY
I was really into complexity theory back in the mid-90s. The
more I got into it, the more I understand the limits of our
knowledge and the limits of our prediction capability. Com-
plexity has been super helpful to me. It has helped me come
to a system that operates in the face of ignorance. I believe we
are fundamentally ignorant and very, very bad at predicting
the future. [4]
ECONOMICS
Microeconomics and game theory are fundamental. I don’t
think you can be successful in business or even navigate most
of our modern capitalist society without an extremely good
understanding of supply-and-demand, labor-versus-capital,
game theory, and those kinds of things. [4]
Ignore the noise. The market will decide.
PRINCIPAL-AGENT PROBLEM
To me, the principal-agent problem is the single most funda-
mental problem in microeconomics. If you do not understand
the principal-agent problem, you will not know how to navi-
gate your way through the world. It is important if you want to
build a successful company or be successful in your dealings.
It’s a very simple concept. Julius Caesar famously said, “If you
want it done, then go. And if not, then send.” What he meant
was, if you want it done right, then you have to go yourself and
do it. When you are the principal, then you are the owner—you
108 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

