

If you are a trusted, reliable, high-integrity, long-term-thinking
dealmaker, when other people want to do deals but don’t know
how to do them in a trustworthy manner with strangers, they
will literally approach you and give you a cut of the deal just
because of the integrity and reputation you’ve built up.
Warren Buffett gets offered deals to buy companies, buy war-
rants, bail out banks, and do things other people can’t do
because of his reputation. Of course, he has accountability
on the line, and he has a strong brand on the line.
Your character and your reputation are things you can build,
which will let you take advantage of opportunities other people
may characterize as lucky, but you know it wasn’t luck. [78]
My co-founder Nivi said, “In a long-term game, it seems that
everybody is making each other rich. And in a short-term game,
it seems like everybody is making themselves rich.”
I think that is a brilliant formulation. In a long-term game, it’s
positive sum. We’re all baking the pie together. We’re trying
to make it as big as possible. And in a short-term game, we’re
cutting up the pie. [78]
How important is networking?
I think business networking is a complete waste of time. And
I know there are people and companies popularizing this con-
cept because it serves them and their business model well, but
the reality is if you’re building something interesting, you will
always have more people who will want to know you. Trying to
build business relationships well in advance of doing business
is a complete waste of time. I have a much more comfortable
philosophy: “Be a maker who makes something interesting
BUILDING WEALTH · 85

NEW PAGE

people want. Show your craft, practice your craft, and the right
people will eventually find you.” [14]
And once you’ve met someone, how do you determine if you
can trust someone? What signals do you pay attention to?
If someone is talking a lot about how honest they are, they’re
probably dishonest. That is just a little telltale indicator I’ve
learned. When someone spends too much time talking about
their own values or they’re talking themselves up, they’re cov-
ering for something. [4]
Sharks eat well but live a life surrounded by sharks.
I have great people in my life who are extremely successful,
very desirable (like everybody wants to be their friend), very
smart. Yet, I’ve seen them do one or two things slightly not
great to other people. The first time, I’ll say, “Hey, I don’t think
you should do this to that other person. Not because you won’t
get away with it. You will get away with it, but because it will
hurt you in the end.”
Not in some cosmic, karma kind of way, but I believe deep
down we all know who we are. You cannot hide anything from
yourself. Your own failures are written within your psyche, and
they are obvious to you. If you have too many of these moral
shortcomings, you will not respect yourself. The worst out-
come in this world is not having self-esteem. If you don’t love
yourself, who will?
I think you just have to be very careful about doing things you
86 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

are fundamentally not going to be proud of, because they will
damage you. The first time someone acts this way, I will warn
them. By the way, nobody changes. Then I just distance myself
from them. I cut them out of my life. I just have this saying
inside my head: “The closer you want to get to me, the better
your values have to be.” [4]
GIVE ME A LEVER
LONG ENOUGH
AND I WILL
MOVE THE
EARTH.
AND A PLACE
TO STAND,
BE PATIENT
One thing I figured out later in life is generally (at least in
the tech business in Silicon Valley), great people have great
outcomes. You just have to be patient. Every person I met at
the beginning of my career twenty years ago, where I looked
at them and said, “Wow, that guy or gal is super capable—so
smart and dedicated”…all of them, almost without exception,
BUILDING WEALTH · 87

