

negative thoughts. It’s about the absence of desire, especially
the absence of desire for external things. The fewer desires
I can have, the more I can accept the current state of things,
the less my mind is moving, because the mind really exists in
motion toward the future or the past. The more present I am,
the happier and more content I will be. If I latch onto a feeling,
if I say, “Oh, I’m happy now,” and I want to stay happy, then I’m
going to drop out of that happiness. Now, suddenly, the mind is
moving. It’s trying to attach to something. It’s trying to create
a permanent situation out of a temporary situation.
Happiness to me is mainly not suffering, not desiring, not think-
ing too much about the future or the past, really embracing the
present moment and the reality of what is, and the way it is. [4]
If you ever want to have peace in your life, you have to move
beyond good and evil.
Nature has no concept of happiness or unhappiness. Nature
follows unbroken mathematical laws and a chain of cause and
effect from the Big Bang to now. Everything is perfect exactly
the way it is. It is only in our particular minds we are unhappy
or not happy, and things are perfect or imperfect because of
what we desire. [4]
The world just reflects your own feelings back at you. Real-
ity is neutral. Reality has no judgments. To a tree, there is no
concept of right or wrong, good or bad. You’re born, you have
a whole set of sensory experiences and stimulations (lights,
colors, and sounds), and then you die. How you choose to inter-
pret them is up to you—you have that choice.
130 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

This is what I mean when I say happiness is a choice. If you
believe it’s a choice, you can start working on it. [77]
There are no external forces affecting your emotions—as
much as it may feel that way.
I’ve also come to believe in the complete and utter insignifi-
cance of the self, and I think that helps a lot. For example, if
you thought you were the most important thing in the Universe,
then you would have to bend the entire Universe to your will.
If you’re the most important thing in the Universe, then how
could it not conform to your desires. If it doesn’t conform to
your desires, something is wrong.
However, if you view yourself as a bacteria or an amoeba—or
if you view all of your works as writing on water or building
castles in the sand, then you have no expectation for how life
should “actually” be. Life is just the way it is. When you accept
that, you have no cause to be happy or unhappy. Those things
almost don’t apply.
Happiness is what’s there when you remove the sense that
something is missing in your life.
What you’re left with in that neutral state is not neutrality. I
think people believe neutrality would be a very bland existence.
No, this is the existence little children live. If you look at little
children, on balance, they’re generally pretty happy because
they are really immersed in the environment and the moment,
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 131

NEW PAGE

without any thought of how it should be given their personal
preferences and desires. I think the neutral state is actually a
perfection state. One can be very happy as long as one isn’t too
caught up in their own head. [4]
Our lives are a blink of a firefly in the night. You’re just barely
here. You have to make the most of every minute, which doesn’t
mean you chase some stupid desire for your entire life. What
it means is every second you have on this planet is very pre-
cious, and it’s your responsibility to make sure you’re happy
and interpreting everything in the best possible way. [9]
We think of ourselves as fixed and the world as malleable,
but it’s really we who are malleable and the world is largely
fixed.
Can practicing meditation help you accept reality?
Yeah. But it’s amazing how little it helps. [laughs] You can be a
long-time meditator, but if someone says the wrong thing in
the wrong way, you go back to your ego-driven self. It’s almost
like you’re lifting one-pound weights, but then somebody
drops a huge barbell with a stack of plates on your head.
It’s absolutely better than doing nothing. But when the actual
moment of mental or emotional suffering arrives, it’s still
never easy. [8] Real happiness only comes as a side-effect of
peace. Most of it is going to come from acceptance, not from
changing your external environment. [8]
132 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

