

I’m pretty much always rereading something by either
Krishnamurti or Osho. Those are my favorite philosophers. [4]
[Update: I’d now add Jed McKenna, Kapil Gupta, the Vashistha
Yoga, and Schopenhauer to that list.]
The Book of Secrets: 112 Meditations to
Discover the Mystery Within by Osho
Most meditation techniques are con-
centration methods, and there are many,
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. many meditation techniques. If you
want to run through a bunch of them, you can pick up a book
called The Book of Secrets by Osho. I know he’s gott en a bad rap
recently, but he was a prett y smart guy. It’s actually a transla-
tion of an old Sanskrit book with 112 diff erent meditations. You
can try each one and see which one works for you. [74]
The Great Challenge: Exploring the World Within by Osho
The Way to Love: The Last Meditations of Anthony de Mello by
Anthony de Mello
The Untethered Soul: The Journey Beyond Yourself by Michael
Singer
Meditationsby Marcus Aurelius
Marcus Aurelius was absolutely life-
changing for me. It’s the personal diary
of the emperor of Rome. Here’s a guy
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. who was probably the most powerful
214 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

human being on Earth at the time he lived. He’s writing a diary
to himself, never expecting it to be published. When you open
this book, you realize he had all the same issues and all the
same mental struggles; he was trying to be a bett er person.
Right there, you fi gure out success and power don’t improve
your internal state—you still have to work on it. [6]
Love Yourself Like Your Life Depends on It by Kamal Ravikant
I’ve actually been reading my brother’s book, Love Yourself Like
Your Life Depends on It. I thought it was very succinctly writt en.
(Obviously a plug for my bro.)
He’s the philosopher in the family—I’m just the amateur. He
has a great line in his book:
I once asked a monk how he found peace.
“I say ‘yes,’” he’d said. “To all that happens, I say ‘yes.’” [7]
The Tao of Seneca: Practical Lett ers from a Stoic Master
My most listened-to audiobook. The most important audio-
book I’ve ever heard.
How to Change Your Mind by Michael
Pollan
There’s a good book Michael Pollan
wrote recently called How to Change
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
NAVAL’S RECOMMENDED READING · 215

NEW PAGE

Your Mind, and I think it is a brilliant book everybody should
read.
The book discusses psychedelics. Psychedelics are a bit of a
cheat code in self-observation. I don’t recommend drugs for
anybody—you can do it all through pure meditation. If you
want to accelerate ahead, you know, psychedelics are good for
that. [74]
Striking Thoughts: Bruce Lee’s Wisdom for Daily Living by
Bruce Lee
Oddly enough, Bruce Lee wrote some great philosophy, and
Striking Thoughts is a good summary of some of his philosophy.
The Prophet by Kahlil Gibran
This book reads like a modern-day poetic religious tome. It’s
up there with the Bhagavad Gita, the Tao Te Ching, the Bible,
and the Qur’an. It is written in the style where it has a feel of
religiosity and truth, but it was very approachable, beautiful,
nondenominational, and nonsectarian. I loved this book.
He has a gift for poetically describing what children are like,
what lovers are like, what marriage should be like, how you
should treat your enemies and your friends, how you should
work with money, what can you think of every time you have
to kill something to eat it. I felt it, like the great religious books,
gave a very deep, very philosophical, but very true answer to
how to approach the major problems in life. I recommend The
Prophet to anybody, whether you’re religious or not. Whether
you are Christian, Hindu, Jewish, or atheist. I think it’s a beau-
tiful book, and it’s worth reading. [7]
216 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

