

something. Maybe you can’t sit still…There’s this “nexting”
thing where you’re sitting in one spot thinking about where
you should be next.
It’s always the next thing, then the next thing, the next thing
after that, then the next thing after that creating this pervasive
anxiety.
It’s most obvious if you ever just sit down and try and do noth-
ing, nothing. I mean nothing, I mean not read a book, I mean
not listen to music, I mean literally just sit down and do noth-
ing. You can’t do it, because there’s anxiety always trying to
make you get up and go, get up and go, get up and go. I think it’s
important just being aware the anxiety is making you unhappy.
The anxiety is just a series of running thoughts.
How I combat anxiety: I don’t try and fight it, I just notice
I’m anxious because of all these thoughts. I try to figure out,
“Would I rather be having this thought right now, or would I
rather have my peace?” Because as long as I have my thoughts,
I can’t have my peace.
You’ll notice when I say happiness, I mean peace. When a lot
of people say happiness, they mean joy or bliss, but I’ll take
peace. [2]
A happy person isn’t someone who’s happy all the time.
It’s someone who effortlessly interprets events in such a way
that they don’t lose their innate peace.
136 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

DESIRE IS
DESIRE TO BE UNHAPPY
UNTIL YOU GET
IS A CONTRACT
THAT YOU MAKE WHAT
YOU
WITH YOURSELF WANT.
EVERY DESIRE IS A CHOSEN UNHAPPINESS
I think the most common mistake for humanity is believ-
ing you’re going to be made happy because of some external
circumstance. I know that’s not original. That’s not new. It’s
fundamental Buddhist wisdom—I’m not taking credit for it. I
think I really just recognize it on a fundamental level, includ-
ing in myself.
We bought a new car. Now, I’m waiting for the new car to arrive.
Of course, every night, I’m on the forums reading about the car.
Why? It’s a silly object. It’s a silly car. It’s not going to change
my life much or at all. I know the instant the car arrives I won’t
care about it anymore. The thing is, I’m addicted to the desir-
ing. I’m addicted to the idea of this external thing bringing
me some kind of happiness and joy, and this is completely
delusional.
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 137

NEW PAGE

Looking outside yourself for anything is the fundamental delu-
sion. Not to say you shouldn’t do things on the outside. You
absolutely should. You’re a living creature. There are things
you do. You locally reverse entropy. That’s why you’re here.
You’re meant to do something. You’re not just meant to lie there
in the sand and meditate all day long. You should self-actualize.
You should do what you are meant to do.
The idea you’re going to change something in the outside world,
and that is going to bring you the peace, everlasting joy, and
happiness you deserve, is a fundamental delusion we all suffer
from, including me. The mistake over and over and over is to
say, “Oh, I’ll be happy when I get that thing,” whatever it is. That
is the fundamental mistake we all make, 24/7, all day long. [4]
The fundamental delusion: There is something out there that
will make me happy and fulfilled forever.
Desire is a contract you make with yourself to be unhappy
until you get what you want. I don’t think most of us realize
that’s what it is. I think we go about desiring things all day long
and then wonder why we’re unhappy. I like to stay aware of it,
because then I can choose my desires very carefully. I try not
to have more than one big desire in my life at any given time,
and I also recognize it as the axis of my suffering. I realize the
area where I’ve chosen to be unhappy. [5]
Desire is a contract you make with yourself to be unhappy
until you get what you want.
138 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

