

Observe when you’re angry—anger is a loss of control over
the situation. Anger is a contract you make with yourself to
be in physical and mental and emotional turmoil until reality
changes. [1]
Anger is its own punishment. An angry person trying to push
your head below water is drowning at the same time.
FREEDOM FROM EMPLOYMENT
People who live far below their means enjoy a freedom that
people busy upgrading their lifestyles can’t fathom. [11]
Once you’ve truly controlled your own fate, for better or for
worse, you’ll never let anyone else tell you what to do. [11]
A taste of freedom can make you unemployable.
FREEDOM FROM UNCONTROLLED THINKING
A big habit I’m working on is trying to turn off my “monkey
mind.” When we’re children, we’re pretty blank slates. We
live very much in the moment. We essentially just react to our
environment through our instincts. We live in what I would
call the “real world.” Puberty is the onset of desire—the first
time you really, really want something and you start long-range
planning. You start thinking a lot, building an identity and an
ego to get what you want.
190 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

If you walk down the street and there are a thousand people in
the street, all thousand are talking to themselves in their head
at any given point. They’re constantly judging everything they
see. They’re playing back movies of things that happened to
them yesterday. They’re living in fantasy worlds of what’s going
to happen tomorrow. They’re just pulled out of base reality.
That can be good when you do long-range planning. It can be
good when you solve problems. It’s good for us as survival-and-
replication machines.
I think it’s actually very bad for your happiness. To me, the
mind should be a servant and a tool, not a master. My monkey
mind should not control and drive me 24/7.
I want to break the habit of uncontrolled thinking, which is
hard. [4]
A busy mind accelerates the passage of subjective time.
There is no endpoint to self-awareness and self-discovery. It’s
a lifelong process you hopefully keep getting better and better
at. There is no one meaningful answer, and no one is going to
fully solve it unless you’re one of these enlightened characters.
Maybe some of us will get there, but I’m not likely to, given how
involved I am in the rat race. The best case is I’m a rat who
might be able to look up at the clouds once in a while.
I think just being aware you’re a rat in a race is about as far as
most of us are going to get. [8]
SAVING YOURSELF · 191

NEW PAGE

The modern struggle:
Lone individuals summoning inhuman willpower, fasting,
meditating, and exercising…
Up against armies of scientists and statisticians weaponizing
abundant food, screens, and medicine into junk food,
clickbait news, infinite porn, endless games, and addictive
drugs.
192 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

