

Related to the skill of reading are the skills of mathematics
and persuasion. Both skills help you to navigate through the
real world.
Having the skill of persuasion is important because if you can
influence your fellow human beings, you can get a lot done. I
think persuasion is an actual skill. So you can learn it, and it’s
not that hard to do so.
Mathematics helps with all the complex and difficult things
in life. If you want to make money, if you want to do sci-
ence, if you want to understand game theory or politics or
economics or investments or computers, all of these things
have mathematics at the core. It’s a foundational language
of nature.
Nature speaks in mathematics. Mathematics is us reverse engi-
neering the language of nature, and we have only scratched
the surface. The good news is you don’t have to know a lot of
math. You just have to know basic statistics, arithmetic, etc.
You should know statistics and probability forwards and back-
wards and inside out. [8]
CHOOSING TO FREE YOURSELF
The hardest thing is not doing what you want—it’s knowing
what you want.
Be aware there are no “adults.” Everyone makes it up as they go
along. You have to find your own path, picking, choosing, and
discarding as you see fit. Figure it out yourself, and do it. [71]
SAVING YOURSELF · 187

NEW PAGE

How have your values changed?
When I was younger, I really, really valued freedom. Freedom
was one of my core values. Ironically, it still is. It’s probably one of
my top three values, but it’s now a different definition of freedom.
My old definition was “freedom to.” Freedom to do anything I
want. Freedom to do whatever I feel like, whenever I feel like.
Now, the freedom I’m looking for is internal freedom. It’s “free-
dom from.” Freedom from reaction. Freedom from feeling
angry. Freedom from being sad. Freedom from being forced
to do things. I’m looking for “freedom from,” internally and
externally, whereas before I was looking for “freedom to.” [4]
Advice to my younger self: “Be exactly who you are.”
Holding back means staying in bad relationships and bad
jobs for years instead of minutes.
FREEDOM FROM EXPECTATIONS
I don’t measure my effectiveness at all. I don’t believe in
self-measurement. I feel like this is a form of self-discipline,
self-punishment, and self-conflict. [1]
If you hurt other people because they have expectations of
you, that’s their problem. If they have an agreement with
you, it’s your problem. But, if they have an expectation of you,
that’s completely their problem. It has nothing to do with you.
They’re going to have lots of expectations out of life. The sooner
you can dash their expectations, the better. [1]
188 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Courage isn’t charging into a machine gun nest. Courage is
not caring what other people think.
Anyone who has known me for a long time knows my defining
characteristic is a combination of being very impatient and
willful. I don’t like to wait. I hate wasting time. I’m very famous
for being rude at parties, events, dinners, where the moment I
figure out it’s a waste of my time, I leave immediately.
Value your time. It is all you have. It’s more important than
your money. It’s more important than your friends. It is more
important than anything. Your time is all you have. Do not
waste your time.
This doesn’t mean you can’t relax. As long as you’re doing what
you want, it’s not a waste of your time. But if you’re not spend-
ing your time doing what you want, and you’re not earning, and
you’re not learning—what the heck are you doing?
Don’t spend your time making other people happy. Other
people being happy is their problem. It’s not your problem. If
you are happy, it makes other people happy. If you’re happy,
other people will ask you how you became happy and they
might learn from it, but you are not responsible for making
other people happy. [10]
FREEDOM FROM ANGER
What is anger? Anger is a way to signal as strongly as you can
to the other party you’re capable of violence. Anger is a pre-
cursor to violence.
SAVING YOURSELF · 189

