

Did your motivation to earn money drop after you become
financially independent?
Yes and no. It did in the sense the desperation was gone.
But if anything, creating businesses and making money are
now more of an “art.” [74]
Whether in commerce, science, or politics—history
remembers the artists.
Art is creativity. Art is anything done for its own sake. What are
the things that are done for their own sake, and there’s nothing
behind them? Loving somebody, creating something, playing.
To me, creating businesses is play. I create businesses because
it’s fun, because I’m into the product. [77]
I can create a new business within three months: raise the
money, assemble a team, and launch it. It’s fun for me. It’s really
cool to see what can I put together. It makes money almost as
a side effect. Creating businesses is the game I became good at.
It’s just my motivation has shifted from being goal-oriented to
being artistic. Ironically, I think I’m much better at it now. [74]
Even when I invest, it’s because I like the people involved, I like
hanging out with them, I learn from them, I think the prod-
uct is really cool. These days, I will pass on great investments
because I don’t find the products interesting.
These are not 100 percent-or-nothing things. You can start
moving more and more toward that goal in your life. It’s a goal.
BUILDING WEALTH · 79

NEW PAGE

When I was younger, I used to be so desperate to make money
that I would have done anything. If you’d shown up and said,
“Hey, I’ve got a sewage trucking business, want to go into that?”
I would have said, “Great, I want to make money!” Thank God
no one gave me that opportunity. I’m glad I went down the
road of technology and science, which I genuinely enjoy. I got
to combine my vocation and my avocation.
I’m always “working.” It looks like work to others, but it feels
like play to me. And that’s how I know no one can compete
with me on it. Because I’m just playing, for sixteen hours a
day. If others want to compete with me, they’re going to work,
and they’re going to lose because they’re not going to do it for
sixteen hours a day, seven days a week. [77]
What was your figure where you thought you were financially
safe?
Money is not the root of all evil; there’s nothing evil about it.
But the lust for money is bad. The lust for money is not bad in
a social sense. It’s not bad in the sense of “you’re a bad person
for lusting for money.” It’s bad for you.
Lusting for money is bad for us because it is a bottomless pit.
It will always occupy your mind. If you love money, and you
make it, there’s never enough. There is never enough because
the desire is turned on and doesn’t turn off at some number.
It’s a fallacy to think it turns off at some number.
The punishment for the love of money is delivered at the same
time as the money. As you make money, you just want even
more, and you become paranoid and fearful of losing what you
do have. There’s no free lunch.
80 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

You make money to solve your money and material problems.
I think the best way to stay away from this constant love of
money is to not upgrade your lifestyle as you make money. It’s
very easy to keep upgrading your lifestyle as you make money.
But if you can hold your lifestyle fixed and hopefully make your
money in giant lump sums as opposed to a trickle at a time,
you won’t have time to upgrade your lifestyle. You may get so
far ahead you actually become financially free.
Another thing that helps: I value freedom above everything
else. All kinds of freedom: freedom to do what I want, freedom
from things I don’t want to do, freedom from my own emotions
or things that may disturb my peace. For me, freedom is my
number one value.
To the extent money buys freedom, it’s great. But to the extent
it makes me less free, which it definitely does at some level as
well, I don’t like it. [74]
The winners of any game are the people who are so addicted
they continue playing even as the marginal utility from
winning declines.
Do I have to start a company to be successful?
The most successful class of people in Silicon Valley on a con-
sistent basis are either the venture capitalists (because they
are diversified and control what used to be a scarce resource)
or people who are very good at identifying companies that have
just hit product/market fit. Those people have the background,
expertise, and references those companies really want to help
BUILDING WEALTH · 81

