

a ten-year journey. Every six months (depending on how fast
you can do it), you’re going to break bad habits and pick up
good habits. [6]
One of the things Krishnamurti talks about is being in an inter-
nal state of revolution. You should always be internally ready
for a complete change. Whenever we say we’re going to try to
do something or try to form a habit, we’re wimping out.
We’re just saying to ourselves, “I’m going to buy myself some
more time.” The reality is when our emotions want us to do
something, we just do it. If you want to go approach a pretty
girl, if you want to have a drink, if you really desire something,
you just go do it.
When you say, “I’m going to do this,” and “I’m going to be that,”
you’re really putting it off. You’re giving yourself an out. At least
if you’re self-aware, you can think, “‘I say I want to do this, but I
don’t really because if I really wanted to do it, I would just do it.”
Commit externally to enough people. For example, if you want
to quit smoking, all you have to do is go to everybody you know
and say, “I quit smoking. I did it. I give you my word.”
That’s all you need to do. Go ahead, right? But most of us say
we’re not quite ready. We know we don’t want to commit our-
selves externally. It’s important to be honest with yourself and
say, “Okay, I’m not ready to give up smoking. I like it too much,
it is going to be too hard for me to give up.”
Say instead, “I’ll set a more reasonable goal for myself; I’ll cut
down to the following amount. I can commit to that externally.
I’m going to work on that for three or six months. When I get
SAVING YOURSELF · 181

NEW PAGE

there, I’ll take the next step, as opposed to beating myself up
over it.”
When you really want to change, you just change. But most of
us don’t really want to change—we don’t want to go through
the pain just yet. At least recognize it, be aware of it, and give
yourself a smaller change you can actually carry out. [6]
Impatience with actions, patience with results.
Anything you have to do, just get it done. Why wait? You’re not
getting any younger. Your life is slipping away. You don’t want
to spend it waiting in line. You don’t want to spend it traveling
back and forth. You don’t want to spend it doing things you
know ultimately aren’t part of your mission.
When you do them, you want to do them as quickly as you can
while doing them well with your full attention. But then, you
just have to be patient with the results because you’re dealing
with complex systems and many people.
It takes a long time for markets to adopt products. It takes
time for people to get comfortable working with each other.
It takes time for great products to emerge as you polish away,
polish away, polish away. Impatience with actions, patience
with results. As Nivi said, inspiration is perishable. When you
have inspiration, act on it right then and there. [78]
182 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

TIME
ACTIONS
RESULTS
CHOOSING TO GROW YOURSELF
I don’t believe in specific goals. Scott Adams famously said,
“Set up systems, not goals.” Use your judgment to figure out
what kinds of environments you can thrive in, and then create
an environment around you so you’re statistically likely to
succeed.
The current environment programs the brain, but the clever
brain can choose its upcoming environment.
I’m not going to be the most successful person on the planet,
nor do I want to be. I just want to be the most successful ver-
sion of myself while working the least hard possible. I want
to live in a way that if my life played out 1,000 times, Naval is
successful 999 times. He’s not a billionaire, but he does pretty
well each time. He may not have nailed life in every regard, but
he sets up systems so he’s failed in very few places. [4]
SAVING YOURSELF · 183

