

I highly recommend listening to the Tim Ferriss’s podcast with
Wim Hof. He is a walking miracle. Wim’s nickname is the Ice
Man. He holds the world record for the longest time spent in
an ice bath and swimming in freezing cold water. I was very
inspired by him, not only because he’s capable of super-human
physical feats, but because he does it while being incredibly
kind and happy—which is not easy to accomplish.
He advocates cold exposure, because he believes people are
too separate from their natural environment. We’re constantly
clothed, fed, and warm. Our bodies have lost touch with the
cold. The cold is important because it can activate the immune
system.
So, he advocates taking long ice baths. Being from the Indian
subcontinent, I’m strongly against the idea of ice baths. But
Wim inspired me to give cold showers a try. And I did so by
using the Wim Hof breathing method. It involves hyperventi-
lating to get more oxygen into your blood, which raises your
core temperature. Then, you can go into the shower.
The first few cold showers were hilarious because I’d slowly
ease myself in, wincing the entire way. I started about four or
five months ago. Now, I turn the shower on full-blast, and then
I walk right in. I don’t give myself any time to hesitate. As soon
as I hear the voice in my head telling me how cold it’s going to
be, I know I have to walk in.
I learned a very important lesson from this: most of our suffer-
ing comes from avoidance. Most of the suffering from a cold
shower is the tip-toeing your way in. Once you’re in, you’re
in. It’s not suffering. It’s just cold. Your body saying it’s cold is
different than your mind saying it’s cold. Acknowledge your
SAVING YOURSELF · 169

NEW PAGE

body saying it’s cold. Look at it. Deal with it. Accept it, but don’t
mentally suffer over it. Taking a cold shower for two minutes
isn’t going to kill you.
Having a cold shower helps you re-learn that lesson every
morning. Now hot showers are just one less thing I need out
of life. [2]
Meditation is intermittent fasting for the mind.
Too much sugar leads to a heavy body, and too many
distractions lead to a heavy mind.
Time spent undistracted and alone, in self-examination,
journaling, meditation, resolves the unresolved and takes us
from mentally fat to fit.
Do you have a current meditation practice?
I think meditation is like dieting, where everyone is supposedly
following a regimen. Everyone says they do it, but nobody actu-
ally does it. The real set of people who meditate on a regular
basis, I’ve found, are pretty rare. I’ve identified and tried at
least four different forms of meditation.
The one I found works best for me is called Choiceless Aware-
ness, or Nonjudgmental Awareness. As you’re going about your
daily business (hopefully, there’s some nature) and you’re not
talking to anybody else, you practice learning to accept the
moment you’re in without making judgments. You don’t think,
“Oh, there’s a homeless guy over there, better cross the street”
170 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

or look at someone running by and say, “He’s out of shape, and
I’m in better shape than him.”
If I saw a guy with a bad hair day, I would at first think “Haha,
he has a bad hair day.” Well, why am I laughing at him to make
me feel better about myself? And why am I trying to make me
feel better about my own hair? Because I’m losing my hair, and
I’m afraid it’s going to go away. What I find is 90 percent of
thoughts I have are fear-based. The other 10 percent may be
desire-based.
You don’t make any decisions. You don’t judge anything. You
just accept everything. If I do that for ten or fifteen minutes
while walking around, I end up in a very peaceful, grateful state.
Choiceless Awareness works well for me. [6]
You could also do transcendental meditation, which is where
you’re using repetitive chanting to create a white noise in your
head to bury your thoughts. Or, you can just very keenly and
very alertly be aware of your thoughts as they happen. As you
watch your thoughts, you realize how many of them are fear-
based. The moment you recognize a fear, without even trying
it goes away. After a while, your mind quiets.
When your mind quiets, you stop taking everything around you
for granted. You start to notice the details. You think, “Wow,
I live in such a beautiful place. It’s so great that I have clothes,
and I can go to Starbucks and get a coffee anytime. Look at
these people—each one has a perfectly valid and complete life
going on in their own heads.”
It pops us out of the story we’re constantly telling ourselves. If
you stop talking to yourself for even ten minutes, if you stop
SAVING YOURSELF · 171

