

obsessing over your own story, you’ll realize we are really far
up Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, and life is pretty good. [6]
Life-hack: When in bed, meditate. Either you will have a
deep meditation or fall asleep. Victory either way.
Another method I’ve learned is to just sit there and you close
your eyes for at least one hour a day. You surrender to what-
ever happens—don’t make any effort whatsoever. You make no
effort for something, and you make no effort against anything.
If there are thoughts running through your mind, you let the
thoughts run.
For your entire life, things have been happening to you. Some
good, some bad, most of which you have processed and dis-
solved, but a few stuck with you. Over time, more and more
stuck with you, and they almost became like these barnacles
stuck to you.
You lost your childhood sense of wonder and of being present
and happy. You lost your inner happiness because you built up
this personality of unresolved pain, errors, fears, and desires
that glommed onto you like a bunch of barnacles.
How do you get those barnacles off you? What happens in
meditation is you’re sitting there and not resisting your mind.
These things will start bubbling up. It’s like a giant inbox of
unanswered emails, going back to your childhood. They will
come out one by one, and you will be forced to deal with them.
You will be forced to resolve them. Resolving them doesn’t take
172 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

any work—you just observe them. Now you’re an adult with
some distance, time, and space from previous events, and you
can just resolve them. You can be much more objective about
how you view them.
Over time, you will resolve a lot of these deep-seated unre-
solved things you have in your mind. Once they’re resolved,
there will come a day when you sit down to meditate, and you’ll
hit a mental “inbox zero.” When you open your mental “email”
and there are none, that is a pretty amazing feeling.
It’s a state of joy and bliss and peace. Once you have it, you
don’t want to give it up. If you can get a free hour of bliss every
morning just by sitting and closing your eyes, that is worth its
weight in gold. It will change your life.
I recommend meditating one hour each morning because any-
thing less is not enough time to really get deep into it. I would
recommend if you really want to try meditation, try sixty days
of one hour a day, first thing in the morning. After about sixty
days, you will be tired of listening to your own mind. You will
have resolved a lot of issues, or you have heard them enough
to see through those fears and issues.
Meditation isn’t hard. All you have to do is sit there and do
nothing. Just sit down. Close your eyes and say, “I’m just going
to give myself a break for an hour. This is my hour off from life.
This is the hour I’m not going to do anything.
“If thoughts come, thoughts come. I’m not going to fight them.
I’m not going to embrace them. I’m not going to think harder
about them. I’m not going to reject them. I’m just going to
sit here for an hour with my eyes closed, and I’m going to do
SAVING YOURSELF · 173

NEW PAGE

nothing.” How hard is that? Why can you not do anything for
an hour? What’s so hard about giving yourself an hour-long
break? [74]
Was there a moment you realized you could control how you
interpreted things? I think one problem people have is not
recognizing they can control how they interpret and respond
to a situation.
I think everyone knows it’s possible. There’s a great Osho lec-
ture, titled “The Attraction for Drugs Is Spiritual.” He talks
about why do people do drugs (everything from alcohol to psy-
chedelics to cannabis). They’re doing it to control their mental
state. They’re doing it to control how they react. Some people
drink because it helps them not care as much, or they’re pot-
heads because they can zone out, or they do psychedelics to
feel very present or connected to nature. The attraction of
drugs is spiritual.
All of society does this to some extent. People chasing thrills
in action sports or flow states or orgasms—any of these states
people strive for are people trying to get out of their own heads.
They’re trying to get away from the voice in their heads—the
overdeveloped sense of self.
At the very least, I do not want my sense of self to continue to
develop and strengthen as I get older. I want it to be weaker
and more muted so I can be more in present everyday reality,
accept nature and the world for what it is, and appreciate it
very much as a child would. [4]
The first thing to realize is you can observe your mental state.
Meditation doesn’t mean you’re suddenly going to gain the
174 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

