

so you have a huge impact without as much time or physical
effort.
A leveraged worker can out-produce a non-leveraged worker
by a factor of one thousand or ten thousand. With a leveraged
worker, judgment is far more important than how much time
they put in or how hard they work.
Forget 10x programmers. 1,000x programmers really exist,
we just don’t fully acknowledge it. See @ID_AA_Carmack,
@notch, Satoshi Nakomoto, etc.
For example, a good software engineer, just by writing the
right little piece of code and creating the right little applica-
tion, can literally create half a billion dollars’ worth of value
for a company. But ten engineers working ten times as hard,
just because they choose the wrong model, the wrong prod-
uct, wrote it the wrong way, or put in the wrong viral loop,
have basically wasted their time. Inputs don’t match outputs,
especially for leveraged workers.
What you want in life is to be in control of your time. You want
to get into a leveraged job where you control your own time
and you’re tracked on the outputs. If you do something incred-
ible to move the needle on the business, they have to pay you.
Especially if they don’t know how you did it because it’s innate
to your obsession or your skill or your innate abilities, they’re
going to have to keep paying you to do it.
If you have specific knowledge, you have accountability and
you have leverage; they have to pay you what you’re worth. If
BUILDING WEALTH · 61

NEW PAGE

they pay you what you’re worth, then you can get your time
back—you can be hyper-efficient. You’re not doing meetings
for meetings’ sake, you’re not trying to impress other people,
you’re not writing things down to make it look like you did
work. All you care about is the actual work itself.
When you do just the actual work itself, you’ll be far more
productive, far more efficient. You’ll work when you feel
like it—when you’re high-energy—and you won’t be trying
to struggle through when you’re low energy. You’ll gain your
time back.
Forty hour work weeks are a relic of the Industrial Age.
Knowledge workers function like athletes—train and sprint,
then rest and reassess.
Sales is an example—especially very high-end sales. If you’re
a real estate agent out there selling houses, it’s not a great job,
necessarily. It’s very crowded. But if you’re a top-tier real estate
agent, you know how to market yourself and you know how to
sell houses, it’s possible you could sell $5 million mansions in
one tenth of the time while somebody else is struggling to sell
$100,000 apartments or condos. Real estate agent is a job with
input and output disconnected.
Building any product and selling any product fits this descrip-
tion. And fundamentally, what else is there? Where you don’t
necessarily want to be is a support role, like customer ser-
vice. In customer service, unfortunately, inputs and outputs
relate relatively close to each other, and the hours you put in
matter. [10]
62 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Tools and leverage create this disconnection between inputs
and outputs. The higher the creativity component of a pro-
fession, the more likely it is to have disconnected inputs and
outputs. If you’re looking at professions where your inputs and
your outputs are highly connected, it’s going to be very hard to
create wealth and make wealth for yourself in that process. [78]
If you want to be part of a great tech company, then you
need to be able to SELL or BUILD. If you don’t do either,
learn.
Learn to sell, learn to build. If you can do both, you will be
unstoppable.
These are two very broad categories. One is building the prod-
uct. This is hard, and it’s multivariate. It can include design; it
can include development; it can include manufacturing, logis-
tics, procurement; and it can even be designing and operating
a service. It has many, many definitions.
But in every industry, there is a definition of the builder. In our
tech industry, it’s the CTO, it’s the programmer, it’s the soft-
ware engineer or hardware engineer. But even in the laundry
business, it could be the person who’s building the laundry
service, who is making the trains run on time, who’s making
sure all the clothes end up in the right place at the right time,
and so on.
The other side of it is sales. Again, selling has a very broad
definition. Selling doesn’t necessarily just mean selling to
individual customers, but it can mean marketing, it can mean
BUILDING WEALTH · 63

