

To make an original contribution, you have to be irrationally
obsessed with something.
160 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

CHOOSING TO CARE FOR YOURSELF
My number one priority in life, above my happiness, above
my family, above my work, is my own health. It starts with
my physical health. Second, it’s my mental health. Third, it’s
my spiritual health. Then, it’s my family’s health. Then, it’s my
family’s wellbeing. After that, I can go out and do whatever I
need to do with the rest of the world. [4]
Nothing like a health problem to turn up the contrast dial for
the rest of life.
What about the modern world steers us away from the way
humans are meant to live?
There are many, many things.
There are a number on the physical side. We have diets we are
not evolved to eat. A correct diet should probably look closer
to a paleo diet, mostly eating vegetables with a small amount
of meat and berries.
In terms of exercise, we’re probably meant to play instead of
running on a treadmill. We’re probably evolved to use all of
our five senses equally as opposed to favoring the visual cortex.
In modern society, almost all of our inputs and communica-
tion are visual. We’re not meant to walk in shoes. A lot of back
and foot problems come from shoes. We’re not meant to have
clothes keep us warm all of the time. We’re meant to have some
cold exposure. It kickstarts your immune system.
We’re not evolved to live in a perfectly sterile and clean envi-
SAVING YOURSELF · 161

NEW PAGE

ronment. It leads to allergies and an untrained immune system.
This is known as the hygiene hypothesis. We’re evolved to live
in much smaller tribes and to have more family around us. I
partially grew up in India, and in India, everybody is in your
business. There’s a cousin, an aunt, an uncle who is in your face,
which makes it hard to be depressed, because you are never
alone. (I’m not referring to people with chemical depression.
I’m talking more about the existential angst and malaise teen-
agers seem to go through.) But on the other hand, you have no
privacy, so you can’t be free. There are trade-offs.
We’re not meant to check our phone every five minutes. The
constant mood swings of getting a “like” then an angry com-
ment makes us into anxious creatures. We evolved for scarcity
but live in abundance. There’s a constant struggle to say no
when your genes always want to say yes. Yes to sugar. Yes to
staying in this relationship. Yes to alcohol. Yes to drugs. Yes,
yes, yes. Our bodies don’t know how to say no. [8]
When everyone is sick, we no longer consider it a disease.
DIET
Outside of math, physics, and chemistry, there isn’t much
“settled science.” We’re still arguing over what the optimal
diet is.
Do you have an opinion on the ketogenic diet?
162 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

