

have one point to make, they make it, and then they give you
example after example after example after example, and they
apply it to explain everything in the world. Once I feel like
I’ve gotten the gist, I feel very comfortable putting the book
down. There’s a lot of these, what I would call pseudoscience
bestsellers…People are like, “Oh, did you read this book?” I
always say yes, but the reality is I read maybe two chapters of
it. I got the gist.
If they wrote it to make money, don’t read it.
What practices do you follow to internalize/organize infor-
mation from reading books?
Explain what you learned to someone else. Teaching forces
learning.
It’s not about “educated” vs. “uneducated.” It’s about “likes
to read” and “doesn’t like to read.”
What can I do for the next sixty days to become a clearer,
more independent thinker?
Read the greats in math, science, and philosophy. Ignore your
contemporaries and news. Avoid tribal identification. Put
truth above social approval. [11]
118 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Study logic and math, because once you’ve mastered them,
you won’t fear any book.
No book in the library should scare you. Whether it’s a math,
physics, electrical engineering, sociology, or economics book.
You should be able to take any book down off the shelf and read
it. A number of them are going to be too difficult for you. That’s
okay—read them anyway. Then go back and reread them and
reread them.
When you’re reading a book and you’re confused, that con-
fusion is similar to the pain you get in the gym when you’re
working out. But you’re building mental muscles instead of
physical muscles. Learn how to learn and read the books.
The problem with saying “just read” is there is so much junk
out there. There are as many different kinds of authors as there
are people. Many of them are going to write lots of junk.
I have people in my life I consider to be very well-read who
aren’t very smart. The reason is because even though they’re
very well-read, they read the wrong things in the wrong order.
They started out reading a set of false or just weakly true things,
and those formed the axioms of the foundation for their worl-
dview. Then, when new things come, they judge the new idea
based on a foundation they already built. Your foundation is
critical.
Because most people are intimidated by math and can’t
independently critique it, they overvalue opinions backed
with math/pseudoscience.
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 119

NEW PAGE

When it comes to reading, make sure your foundation is very,
very high quality.
The best way to have a high-quality foundation (you may not
love this answer), but the trick is to stick to science and to
stick to the basics. Generally, there are only a few things you
can read people don’t disagree with. Very few people disagree
2+2=4, right? That is serious knowledge. Mathematics is a solid
foundation.
Similarly, the hard sciences are a solid foundation. Microeco-
nomics is a solid foundation. The moment you start wandering
outside of these solid foundations you’re in trouble because
now you don’t know what’s true and what’s false. I would focus
as much as I could on having solid foundations.
It’s better to be really great at arithmetic and geometry than to
be deep into advanced mathematics. I would read microeco-
nomics all day long—Microeconomics 101.
Another way to do this is to read originals and read classics.
If you’re interested in evolution, read Charles Darwin. Don’t
begin with Richard Dawkins (even though I think he’s great).
Read him later; read Darwin first.
If you want to learn macroeconomics, first read Adam Smith,
read von Mises, or read Hayek. Start with the original philos-
ophers of the economy. If you’re into communist or socialist
ideas (which I’m personally not), start by reading Karl Marx.
Don’t read the current interpretation someone is feeding you
about how things should be done and run.
If you start with the originals as your foundations, then you
120 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

