

ing down, it can wait another thirty minutes until I’m done
working out.
It’s pretty much every day. There are a few days where I’ve had
to take a break because I’m traveling, or I’m injured or sick or
something. I can count on one hand the number of breaks I
take every year. [4]
One month of consistent yoga and I feel 10 years younger. To
stay flexible is to stay young.
How you make a habit doesn’t matter. Do something every
day. It almost doesn’t matter what you do. The people who are
obsessing over whether to do weight training, tennis, Pilates,
the high-intensity interval training method, “The Happy Body,”
or whatever. They’re missing the point. The important thing is
to do something every day. It doesn’t matter what it is. The best
workout for you is one you’re excited enough to do every day. [4]
Walking meetings:
• Brain works better
• Exercise & sunlight
• Shorter, less pleasantries
• More dialogue, less monologue
• No slides
• End easily by walking back
Like everything in life, if you are willing to make the short-term
sacrifice, you’ll have the long-term benefit. My physical trainer
166 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

(Jerzy Gregorek) is a really wise, brilliant guy. He always says,
“Easy choices, hard life. Hard choices, easy life.”
Basically, if you are making the hard choices right now in what
to eat, you’re not eating all the junk food you want, and making
the hard choice to work out. So, your life long-term will be
easy. You won’t be sick. You won’t be unhealthy. The same is
true of values. The same is true of saving up for a rainy day.
The same is true of how you approach your relationships. If
you make the easy choices right now, your overall life will
be a lot harder. [4]
MEDITATION
IS
INTERMITTENTFASTING
FOR THE MIND.
SAVING YOURSELF · 167

NEW PAGE

MEDITATION + MENTAL STRENGTH
An emotion is our evolved biology predicting the future
impact of a current event. In modern settings, it’s usually
exaggerated or wrong.
Why is meditation so powerful?
Your breath is one of the few places where your autonomic
nervous system meets your voluntary nervous system. It’s
involuntary, but you can also control it.
I think a lot of meditation practices put an emphasis on the
breath because it is a gateway into your autonomic nervous
system. There are many, many cases in the medical and spiri-
tual literature of people controlling their bodies at levels that
should be autonomous.
Your mind is such a powerful thing. What’s so unusual about
your forebrain sending signals to your hindbrain and your
hindbrain routing resources to your entire body?
You can do it just by breathing. Relaxed breathing tells your
body you’re safe. Then, your forebrain doesn’t need as many
resources as it normally does. Now, the extra energy can be
sent to your hindbrain, and it can reroute those resources to
the rest of your body.
I’m not saying you can beat whatever illness you have just
because you activated your hindbrain. But you’re devoting
most of the energy normally required to care about the exter-
nal environment to the immune system.
168 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

