

great litt le pitch that says, “The only book used in both grade
school and graduate school.” It’s true. It’s all simple physics
puzzles that can be explained to a twelve-year-old child and
can be explained to a twenty-five-year-old grad student in
physics. They all have fundamental insights in physics. They’re
all kind of tricky, but anyone can get to the answer through
purely logical reasoning. [4]
The Lessons of Historyby Will and Ariel Durant
This is a great book I really like that summarizes some of the
larger themes of history; it’s very incisive. And unlike most
history books, it’s actually really small, and it covers a lot of
ground. [7]
The Sovereign Individual: Mastering the Transition to the
Information Ageby James Dale Davidson and Lord William
Rees-Mogg
This is the best book I’ve read since Sapiens (far less main-
stream, though).
Poor Charlie’s Almanack: The Wit and
Wisdom of Charles T. Mungerby Charlie
Munger (edited by Peter Kaufman)
This masquerades as a business book,
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. but it’s really just Charlie Munger (of
Berkshire Hathaway)’s advice on overcoming oneself to live a
successful and virtuous life. [7] [80]
Reality Is Not What It Seems: The Journey to Quantum Gravity
by Carlo Rovelli
NAVAL’S RECOMMENDED READING · 211

NEW PAGE

This is the best book I’ve read in the last year. Physics, poetry,
philosophy, and history packaged in a very accessible form.
Seven Brief Lessons on Physics by Carlo Rovelli
I’ve read this one at least twice.
For game theory, in addition to playing strategy games, you
may want to try The Compleat Strategyst: Being a Primer on the
Theory of Games of Strategy by J.D. Williams and The Evolution
of Cooperation by Robert Axelrod. [11]
PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALITY
Everything by Jed McKenna
Jed spits raw truth. His style may be off-putting, but the ded-
ication to truth is unparalleled. [79]
Theory of Everything (The Enlightened Perspective) - Dream-
state Trilogy
Jed McKenna’s Notebook
Jed Talks #1 and #2
Everything by Kapil Gupta, MD
Kapil recently became a personal advisor and coach to me, and
this comes from a person who doesn’t believe in coaches. [79]
A Master’s Secret Whispers: For those who abhor noise and seek
The Truth…about life and living
212 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Direct Truth: Uncompromising, non-prescriptive Truths to the
enduring questions of life
Atmamun: The Path to achieving the bliss of the Himalayan
Swamis. And the freedom of a living God.
The Book of Lifeby Jiddu Krishnamurti
Krishnamurti is a lesser-known guy,
an Indian philosopher who lived at the
turn of the last century and is extremely
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. infl uential to me. He’s an uncompromis-
ing, very direct person who basically tells you to look at your
own mind at all times. I have been hugely infl uenced by him.
Probably the best book is The Book of Life, which is excerpts
from his various speeches and books stitched together. [6]
I’ll give my kids a copy of The Book of Life. I’ll tell them to save
it until they’re older because it won’t make much sense while
they’re younger. [8]
Total Freedom: The Essential Krishnamurti by Jiddu
Krishnamurti
I like this for someone who’s more advanced. A rationalist’s
guide to the perils of the human mind. The “spiritual” book I
keep returning to. [1]
Siddharthaby Herman Hesse
I love this as a classic book on philosophy, a good introduction
for someone starting out. I’ve given out more copies of this
book than any other. [1]
NAVAL’S RECOMMENDED READING · 213

