

SCIENCE FICTION
I started with comic books and sci-fi . Then I was into
history and news. Then into psychology, popular science,
technology.
Ficcionesby Jorge Luis Borges
I love Jorge Luis Borges, an Argen-
tine author. His short story collection
Ficciones, or Labyrinths, is amazing.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. Borges is probably still the most pow-
erful author I have read who wasn’t just outright writing
philosophy. There was philosophy in there with the sci-fi. [1]
Stories of Your Life and Othersby Ted
Chiang
My current favorite sci-fi short story:
probably “Understand” by Ted Chiang.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. It’s in a collection called Stories of Your
Life and Others. “Story of Your Life” was made into a movie
called Arrival. [1]
Exhalation: Storiesby Ted Chiang
This contemplates the marvel of thermodynamics from the
best sci-fi short story writer of our age.
The Lifecycle of Soft ware Objectsby Ted Chiang
Another masterpiece of sci-fi by Ted Chiang.
NAVAL’S RECOMMENDED READING · 217

NEW PAGE

Snow Crashby Neal Stephenson
Snow Crash is an amazing, amazing
book. There’s nothing quite similar to
Snow Crash. Snow Crash is in a league
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. of its own. Stephenson also wrote The
Diamond Age.
“The Last Question,” a short story by Isaac Asimov
I quote “The Last Question” all the time. I loved it as a kid.
What are the books you’re rereading now?
That’s a good question. I’ll pull up my Kindle app as we talk.
Usually, I’m always rereading some books in science.
I’m reading a book on René Girard’s mimetic theory. It’s more
of an overview book, because I couldn’t make it through his
actual writings. I’m reading Tools of Titans, Tim Ferriss’s book
of what he learned from a lot of great performers.
I’m reading a book, Thermoinfocomplexity. It’s actually by
a friend of mine, Behzad Mohit. I just fi nished reading Pre-
Suasion: A Revolutionary Way to Inﬂ uence and Persuade, or
I should say I just fi nished skimming Pre-Suasion by Robert
Cialdini. I don’t think I needed to read the entire book to get
the point, but it was still good to read what I did. It’s a great
litt le history book. I’m currently reading The Story of Philos-
ophy: The Lives and Opinions of the Great Philosophers, also
by Will Durant.
I have a young kid now, so I’ve got a lot of child-rearing books
218 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

I use more as reference material than anything else. I recently
read some Emerson and some Chesterfield. I have a Leo Tolstoy
book here.
Alan Watts. Scott Adams. I reread God’s Debris recently. Tao Te
Ching, a friend of mine is rereading it, so I picked it up again.
There’s tons. I mean, I could go on and on. There’s Nietzsche’s
book here. There’s The Undercover Economist [Tim Harford].
The Richard Bach book [Illusions: The Adventures of a Reluctant
Messiah]. There are some Jed McKenna books.
A little Dale Carnegie in here. The Three-Body Problem [Cixin
Liu]. Man’s Search for Meaning [Viktor E. Frankl]. There’s lots.
Sex at Dawn [Christopher Ryan]. There’s a lot of books out there.
By the way, when I tell people what I’m reading, I skip two-
thirds of my books. The reason I skip two-thirds is because
they’re embarrassing. They don’t sound like good books to
read. They’ll sound trivial or silly. Who cares? I don’t have to
tell everybody everything I read. I read all kinds of stuff other
people consider junk or even reprehensible. I read all kinds of
stuff I disagree with because they’re mind-bending. [4]
I always spent money on books. I never viewed that as an
expense. That’s an investment to me. [4]
BLOGS
(Since there are so many links in this section, you may prefer a
digital copy. Go to Navalmanack.com to get a digital version of
this chapter for your convenience.)
NAVAL’S RECOMMENDED READING · 219

