

Read what you love until you love to read.
You almost have to read the stuff you’re reading, because you’re
into it. You don’t need any other reason. There’s no mission
here to accomplish. Just read because you enjoy it.
These days, I find myself rereading as much (or more) as I do
reading. A tweet from @illacertus said, “I don’t want to read
everything. I just want to read the 100 great books over and
over again.” I think there’s a lot to that idea. It’s really more
about identifying the great books for you because different
books speak to different people. Then, you can really absorb
those.
Reading a book isn’t a race—the better the book, the more
slowly it should be absorbed.
I don’t know about you, but I have very poor attention. I skim.
I speed read. I jump around. I could not tell you specific pas-
sages or quotes from books. At some deep level, you absorb
them, and they become threads in the tapestry of your psyche.
They kind of weave in there.
I’m sure you’ve had this feeling where you pick up a book and
start reading it, and you’re like, “This is pretty interesting. This
is pretty good.” You’re getting this increasing sense of deja vu.
Then halfway through the book, you realize, “I’ve read this
book before.” That’s perfectly fine. It means you were ready
to reread it. [4]
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 115

NEW PAGE

I don’t actually read a lot of books. I pick up a lot of books
and only get through a few which form the foundation of my
knowledge.
The reality is, I don’t actually read much compared to what
people think. I probably read one to two hours a day. That puts
me in the top .00001 percent. I think that alone accounts for
any material success I’ve had in my life and any intelligence I
might have. Real people don’t read an hour a day. Real people,
I think, read a minute a day or less. Making it an actual habit
is the most important thing.
It almost doesn’t matter what you read. Eventually, you will
read enough things (and your interests will lead you there)
that it will dramatically improve your life. Just like the best
workout for you is one you’re excited enough to do every day,
I would say for books, blogs, tweets, or whatever—anything
with ideas and information and learning—the best ones to
read are the ones you’re excited about reading all the time. [4]
“As long as I have a book in my hand, I don’t feel like I’m
wasting time.”
—Charlie Munger
Everyone’s brain works differently. Some people love to take
notes. Actually, my notetaking is Twitter. I read and read and
read. If I have some fundamental “ah-ha” insight or concept,
Twitter forces me to distill it into a few characters. Then I try
and put it out there as an aphorism. Then I get attacked by
116 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

random people who point out all kinds of obvious exceptions
and jump down my throat. Then I think, “Why did I do this
again?” [4]
Pointing out obvious exceptions implies either the target isn’t
smart or you aren’t.
When you first pick up a book, are you skimming for some-
thing interesting? How do you go about reading it? Do you
just flip to a random page and start reading? What’s your
process?
I’ll start at the beginning, but I’ll move fast. If it’s not interest-
ing, I’ll just start flipping ahead, skimming, or speed reading. If
it doesn’t grab my attention within the first chapter in a mean-
ingful, positive way, I’ll either drop the book or skip ahead a
few chapters.
I don’t believe in delayed gratification when there are an
infinite number of books out there to read. There are so many
great books.
The number of books completed is a vanity metric. As you
know more, you leave more books unfinished. Focus on new
concepts with predictive power.
Generally, I’ll skim. I’ll fast forward. I’ll try and find a part to
catch my attention. Most books have one point to make. (Obvi-
ously, this is nonfiction. I’m not talking about fiction.) They
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 117

