

BOOKS
(Since there are so many links in this section, you may prefer a
digital copy. Go to Navalmanack.com to get a digital version of
this chapter for your convenience.)
Read enough, and you become a connoisseur. Then you
naturally gravitate more toward theory, concepts, nonfi ction.
NONFICTION
The Beginning of Inﬁ nity: Explanations That Transform the
World by David Deutsch
Not the easiest read, but it made me smarter. [79]
Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind
by Yuval Noah Harari
A history of the human species. The
observations, frameworks, and mental
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. models will have you looking at history
and your fellow humans diff erently. [1]
Sapiens is the best book of the last decade I have read. He had
decades to write Sapiens. There are lots of great ideas in there
and it’s just full of them, chock-full per page. [1]
The Rational Optimist: How Prosperity Evolves by Matt Ridley
The most brilliant and enlightening book I’ve read in years. He
has writt en four of my top twenty books. [11]
208 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Everything else writt en by Matt Ridley.
Matt is a scientist, optimist, and forward
thinker. One of my favorite authors. I’ve
read everything of his, and reread every-
thing of his. [4]
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
→ Genome: The Autobiography of a Species in 23 Chapters
→ The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature
→ The Origins of Virtue: Human Instincts and the Evolution
of Cooperation
→ The Evolution of Everything: How New Ideas Emerge
Skin in the Gameby Nassim Taleb
The best book I read in 2018, I highly
recommend it. Lots of great ideas in
there. Lots of good mental models and
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. constructs. He has a bit of an att itude,
but he has that because he’s brilliant, and it’s okay. So just look
past the att itude and read the book, learn the concepts. It’s one
of the best business books I’ve ever read. And luckily, it doesn’t
masquerade as a business book. [10]
The Bed of Procrustes: Philosophical and Practical Aphorisms
by Nassim Taleb
This is his collection of ancient wisdom. He is also famous for
The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, Antifrag-
ile: Things That Gain from Disorder, and Fooled by Randomness:
The Hidden Role of Chance in Life and in the Markets, all of
which are worth reading. [7]
NAVAL’S RECOMMENDED READING · 209

NEW PAGE

Six Easy Pieces: Essentials of Physics
Explained by Its Most Brilliant Teacher
by Richard Feynman
I would give my kids a copy of Rich-
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. ard Feynman’s Six Easy Pieces and Six
Not-So-Easy Pieces: Einstein’s Relativity, Symmetry, and Space-
Time. Richard Feynman is a famous physicist. I love both his
demeanor as well as his understanding of physics.
I’ve also been reading Perfectly Reasonable Deviations from
the Beaten Track by Feynman and rereading Genius: The Life
and Science of Richard Feynman, a biography about him. [8]
Thing Explainer: Complicated Stuﬀ in
Simple Wordsby Randall Munroe
A great book by Randall Munroe (cre-
ator of xkcd, a very science-oriented
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. webcomic). In this book, he explains
very complicated concepts, all the way from climate change
to physical systems to submarines while only using the thou-
sand most common words in the English language. He called
the Saturn Five rocket “Up Goer Five.” You can’t defi ne a rocket
as a spaceship or a rocket. It’s self-referential. He says “up goer.”
It’s this thing that goes up. Kids get it right away. [4]
Thinking Physics: Understandable Prac-
tical Reality by Lewis Carroll Epstein
There’s another great book called Think-
ing Physics. I open this one all the time.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image. I love on the back cover how it has this
210 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

