

JUDGMENT
If you want to make the maximum amount of money possi-
ble, if you want to get rich over your life in a deterministically
predictable way, stay on the bleeding edge of trends and
study technology, design, and art—become really good at
something. [1]
You don’t get rich by spending your time to save money.
You get rich by saving your time to make money.
Hard work is really overrated. How hard you work matters a
lot less in the modern economy.
What is underrated?
Judgment. Judgment is underrated. [1]
Can you define judgment?
My definition of wisdom is knowing the long-term conse-
quences of your actions. Wisdom applied to external problems
is judgment. They’re highly linked; knowing the long-term
consequences of your actions and then making the right deci-
sion to capitalize on that. [78]
In an age of leverage, one correct decision can win
everything.
94 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Without hard work, you’ll develop neither judgment nor
leverage.
You have to put in the time, but the judgment is more import-
ant. The direction you’re heading in matters more than how
fast you move, especially with leverage. Picking the direction
you’re heading in for every decision is far, far more important
than how much force you apply. Just pick the right direction
to start walking in, and start walking. [1]
HOW TO THINK CLEARLY
“Clear thinker” is a better compliment than “smart.”
Real knowledge is intrinsic, and it’s built from the ground up.
To use a math example, you can’t understand trigonometry
without understanding arithmetic and geometry. Basically, if
someone is using a lot of fancy words and a lot of big concepts,
they probably don’t know what they’re talking about. I think
the smartest people can explain things to a child. If you can’t
explain it to a child, then you don’t know it. It’s a common
saying and it’s very true.
Richard Feynman very famously does this in “Six Easy
Pieces,” one of his early physics lectures. He basically explains
mathematics in three pages. He starts from the number line—
counting—and then he goes all the way up to precalculus. He
just builds it up through an unbroken chain of logic. He doesn’t
rely on any definitions.
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 95

NEW PAGE

The really smart thinkers are clear thinkers. They understand
the basics at a very, very fundamental level. I would rather
understand the basics really well than memorize all kinds of
complicated concepts I can’t stitch together and can’t rederive
from the basics. If you can’t rederive concepts from the basics
as you need them, you’re lost. You’re just memorizing. [4]
The advanced concepts in a field are less proven. We use them
to signal insider knowledge, but we’d be better off nailing the
basics. [11]
Clear thinkers appeal to their own authority.
Part of making effective decisions boils down to dealing with
reality. How do you make sure you’re dealing with reality
when you’re making decisions?
By not having a strong sense of self or judgments or mind
presence. The “monkey mind” will always respond with this
regurgitated emotional response to what it thinks the world
should be. Those desires will cloud your reality. This happens
a lot of times when people are mixing politics and business.
The number one thing clouding us from being able to see real-
ity is we have preconceived notions of the way it should be.
One definition of a moment of suffering is “the moment when
you see things exactly the way they are.” This whole time, you’ve
been convinced your business is doing great, and really, you’ve
ignored the signs it’s not doing well. Then, your business fails,
96 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

