

How did you decide to start your first company?
I was working at this tech company called @Home Network,
and I told everybody around me—my boss, coworkers, my
friends, “In Silicon Valley, all of these other people are start-
ing companies. It looks like they can do it. I’m going to start
a company. I’m just here temporarily. I’m an entrepreneur.”
…I didn’t actually mean to trick myself into it. It wasn’t a delib-
erate, calculated thing.
I was just venting, talking out loud, being overly honest. But
I didn’t actually start a company. This was in 1996, it was a
much scarier, more difficult proposition to start a company
then. Sure enough, everyone started saying “What are you still
doing here? I thought you were leaving to start a company?”
and “Wow, you’re still here…” I was literally embarrassed into
starting my own company. [5]
Yes, I know some people aren’t necessarily ready to be entre-
preneurs, but long-term, where did we come up with this
idea the correct logical thing to do is for everybody to work
for somebody else? It is a very hierarchical model. [14]
FIND WORK THAT FEELS LIKE PLAY
Humans evolved as hunters and gatherers where we all
worked for ourselves. It’s only at the beginning of agriculture
we became more hierarchical. The Industrial Revolution and
factories made us extremely hierarchical because one indi-
vidual couldn’t necessarily own or build a factory, but now,
thanks to the internet, we’re going back to an age where more
and more people can work for themselves. I would rather be a
76 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

failed entrepreneur than someone who never tried. Because
even a failed entrepreneur has the skill set to make it on their
own. [14]
There are almost 7 billion people on this planet. Someday, I
hope, there will be almost 7 billion companies.
I learned how to make money because it was a necessity. After
it stopped being a necessity, I stopped caring about it. At least
for me, work was a means to an end. Making money was a
means to an end. I’m much more interested in solving prob-
lems than I am in making money.
Any end goal will just lead to another goal, lead to another goal.
We just play games in life. When you grow up, you’re playing
the school game, or you’re playing the social game. Then you’re
playing the money game, and then you’re playing the status
game. These games just have longer and longer and longer-
lived horizons. At some point, at least I believe, these are all
just games. These are games where the outcome really stops
mattering once you see through the game.
Then you just get tired of games. I would say I’m at the stage
where I’m just tired of games. I don’t think there is any end
goal or purpose. I’m just living life as I want to. I’m literally
just doing it moment to moment.
I want to be off the hedonic treadmill. [1]
What you really want is freedom. You want freedom from your
money problems, right? I think that’s okay. Once you can solve
BUILDING WEALTH · 77

NEW PAGE

your money problems, either by lowering your lifestyle or by
making enough money, you want to retire. Not retirement at
sixty-five years old, sitting in a nursing home collecting a check
retirement—it’s a different definition.
What is your definition of retirement?
Retirement is when you stop sacrificing today for an imagi-
nary tomorrow. When today is complete, in and of itself, you’re
retired.
How do you get there?
Well, one way is to have so much money saved that your passive
income (without you lifting a finger) covers your burn rate.
A second is you just drive your burn rate down to zero—you
become a monk.
A third is you’re doing something you love. You enjoy it so
much, it’s not about the money. So there are multiple ways
to retirement.
The way to get out of the competition trap is to be authen-
tic, to find the thing you know how to do better than anybody.
You know how to do it better because you love it, and no one
can compete with you. If you love to do it, be authentic, and
then figure out how to map that to what society actually wants.
Apply some leverage and put your name on it. You take the
risks, but you gain the rewards, have ownership and equity in
what you’re doing, and just crank it up. [77]
78 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

