

When you choose something, you get locked in for a long time.
Starting a business may take ten years. You start a relationship
that will be five years or maybe more. You move to a city for
ten to twenty years. These are very, very long-lived decisions.
It’s very, very important we only say yes when we are pretty
certain. You’re never going to be absolutely certain, but you’re
going to be very certain.
If you find yourself creating a spreadsheet for a decision with
a list of yes’s and no’s, pros and cons, checks and balances, why
this is good or bad…forget it. If you cannot decide, the answer
is no. [10]
RUN UPHILL
Simple heuristic: If you’re evenly split on a difficult decision,
take the path more painful in the short term.
If you have two choices to make, and they’re relatively equal
choices, take the path more difficult and more painful in the
short term.
What’s actually going on is one of these paths requires short-
term pain. And the other path leads to pain further out in
the future. And what your brain is doing through conflict-
avoidance is trying to push off the short-term pain.
By definition, if the two are even and one has short-term pain,
that path has long-term gain associated. With the law of com-
pound interest, long-term gain is what you want to go toward.
112 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Your brain is overvaluing the side with the short-term happi-
ness and trying to avoid the one with short-term pain.
So you have to cancel the tendency out (it’s a powerful subcon-
scious tendency) by leaning into the pain. As you know, most
of the gains in life come from suffering in the short term so
you can get paid in the long term.
Working out for me is not fun; I suffer in the short term, I feel
pain. But then in the long term, I’m better off because I have
muscles or I’m healthier.
If I am reading a book and I’m getting confused, it is just like
working out and the muscle getting sore or tired, except now
my brain is being overwhelmed. In the long run I’m getting
smarter because I’m absorbing new concepts from working
at the limit or edge of my capability.
So you generally want to lean into things with short-term pain,
but long-term gain.
What are the most efficient ways to build new mental models?
Read a lot—just read. [2]
Reading science, math, and philosophy one hour per day will
likely put you at the upper echelon of human success within
seven years.
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 113

NEW PAGE

LEARN TO LOVE TO READ
(Specific recommendations for books, blogs, and more are in
“Naval’s Recommended Reading” section.)
The genuine love for reading itself, when cultivated, is a super-
power. We live in the age of Alexandria, when every book and
every piece of knowledge ever written down is a fingertip away.
The means of learning are abundant—it’s the desire to learn
that is scarce. [3]
Reading was my first love. [4]
I remember my grandparents’ house in India. I’d be a little
kid on the floor going through all of my grandfather’s Read-
er’s Digests, which is all he had to read. Now, of course, there’s
a smorgasbord of information out there—anybody can read
anything all the time. Back then, it was much more limited.
I would read comic books, storybooks, whatever I could get
my hands on.
I think I always loved to read because I’m actually an antiso-
cial introvert. I was lost in the world of words and ideas from
an early age. I think some of it comes from the happy cir-
cumstance that when I was young, nobody forced me to read
certain things.
I think there’s a tendency among parents and teachers to
say, “Oh, you should read this, but don’t read that.” I read a
lot which (by today’s standards) would be considered mental
junk food. [4]
114 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

