

got cheated out of by my business partners. It’s only the third
time around that has been a charm.
Even then, it has been a slow and steady struggle. I haven’t
made money in my life in one giant payout. It has always been
a whole bunch of small things piling up. It’s more about con-
sistently creating wealth by creating businesses, creating
opportunities, and creating investments. It hasn’t been a
giant one-off thing. My personal wealth has not been gener-
ated by one big year. It just stacks up a little bit, a few chips
at a time: more options, more businesses, more investments,
more things I can do.
Thanks to the internet, opportunities are massively abundant.
In fact, I have too many ways to make money. I don’t have
enough time. I literally have opportunities pouring out of my
ears, and I keep running out of time. There are so many ways
to create wealth, to create products, to create businesses, and
to get paid by society as a byproduct. I just can’t handle them
all. [78]
Value your time at an hourly rate, and ruthlessly spend to
save time at that rate. You will never be worth more than you
think you’re worth.
No one is going to value you more than you value yourself. You
just have to set a very high personal hourly rate and you have
to stick to it. Even when I was young, I just decided I was worth
a lot more than the market thought I was worth, and I started
treating myself that way.
70 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

Always factor your time into every decision. How much time
does it take? It’s going to take you an hour to get across town
to get something. If you value yourself at one hundred dollars
an hour, that’s basically throwing one hundred dollars out of
your pocket. Are you going to do that? [78]
Fast-forward to your wealthy self and pick some intermediate
hourly rate. For me, believe it or not, back when you could have
hired me…Which now obviously you can’t, but back when you
could have hired me…this was true a decade ago or even two
decades ago, before I had any real money. My hourly rate, I used
to say to myself over and over, is $5,000 an hour. Today when
I look back, really it was about $1,000 an hour.
Of course, I still ended up doing stupid things like arguing with
the electrician or returning the broken speaker, but I shouldn’t
have, and I did a lot less than any of my friends would. I would
make a theatrical show out of throwing something in the trash
pile or giving it to Salvation Army rather than trying to return
it or handing something to people rather than trying to fix it.
I would argue with my girlfriends, and even today it’s my wife,
“I don’t do that. That’s not a problem that I solve.” I still argue
that with my mother when she hands me little to-do’s. I just
don’t do that. I would rather hire you an assistant. This was
true even when I didn’t have money. [78]
Another way of thinking about something is, if you can out-
source something or not do something for less than your hourly
rate, outsource it or don’t do it. If you can hire someone to do
it for less than your hourly rate, hire them. That even includes
things like cooking. You may want to eat your healthy home
cooked meals, but if you can outsource it, do that instead. [78]
BUILDING WEALTH · 71

NEW PAGE

Set a very high hourly aspirational rate for yourself and stick
to it. It should seem and feel absurdly high. If it doesn’t, it’s not
high enough. Whatever you picked, my advice to you would be
to raise it. Like I said, for myself, even before I had money, for
the longest time I used $5,000 an hour. And if you extrapolate
that out into what it looks like as an annual salary, it’s multiple
millions of dollars per year.
Ironically, I actually think I’ve beaten it. I’m not the hardest
working person—I’m actually a lazy person. I work through
bursts of energy where I’m really motivated with something.
If I actually look at how much I’ve earned per actual hour that
I’ve put in, it’s probably quite a bit higher than that. [78]
Can you expand on your statement, “If you secretly despise
wealth, it will elude you”?
If you get into a relative mindset, you’re always going to hate
people who do better than you, you’re always going to be jeal-
ous or envious of them. They’ll sense those feelings when you
try and do business with them. When you try and do business
with somebody, if you have any bad thoughts or any judgments
about them, they will feel it. Humans are wired to feel what
the other person deep down inside feels. You have to get out
of a relative mindset. [10]
Literally, being anti-wealth will prevent you from becoming
wealthy, because you will not have the right mindset for it,
you won’t have the right spirit, and you won’t be dealing with
people on the right level. Be optimistic, be positive. It’s import-
ant. Optimists actually do better in the long run. [10]
72 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

