

LEARNING HAPPINESS
Don’t take yourself so seriously. You’re just a monkey with a
plan.
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 127

NEW PAGE

HAPPINESS IS LEARNED
Ten years ago, if you would have asked me how happy I was, I
would have dismissed the question. I didn’t want to talk about
it.
On a scale of 1–10, I would have said 2/10 or 3/10. Maybe 4/10
on my best days. But I did not value being happy.
Today, I am a 9/10. And yes, having money helps, but it’s actu-
ally a very small piece of it. Most of it comes from learning over
the years my own happiness is the most important thing to me,
and I’ve cultivated it with a lot of techniques. [10]
Maybe happiness is not something you inherit or even
choose, but a highly personal skill that can be learned, like
fitness or nutrition.
Happiness is a very evolving thing, I think, like all the great
questions. When you’re a little kid, you go to your mom and
ask, “What happens when we die? Is there a Santa Claus? Is
there a God? Should I be happy? Who should I marry?” Those
kinds of things. There are no glib answers because no answers
apply to everybody. These kinds of questions ultimately do
have answers, but they have personal answers.
The answer that works for me is going to be nonsense to you,
and vice versa. Whatever happiness means to me, it means
something different to you. I think it’s very important to
explore what these definitions are.
For some people I know, it’s a flow state. For some people, it’s
128 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

satisfaction. For some people, it’s a feeling of contentment. My
definition keeps evolving. The answer I would have given you
a year ago will be different than what I tell you now.
Today, I believe happiness is really a default state. Happiness
is there when you remove the sense of something missing in
your life.
We are highly judgmental survival-and-replication machines.
We constantly walk around thinking, “I need this,” or “I need
that,” trapped in the web of desires. Happiness is the state
when nothing is missing. When nothing is missing, your mind
shuts down and stops running into the past or future to regret
something or to plan something.
In that absence, for a moment, you have internal silence. When
you have internal silence, then you are content, and you are
happy. Feel free to disagree. Again, it’s different for everybody.
People mistakenly believe happiness is just about positive
thoughts and positive actions. The more I’ve read, the more
I’ve learned, and the more I’ve experienced (because I verify
this for myself), every positive thought essentially holds within
it a negative thought. It is a contrast to something negative.
The Tao Te Ching says this more articulately than I ever could,
but it’s all duality and polarity. If I say I’m happy, that means I
was sad at some point. If I say he’s attractive, then somebody
else is unattractive. Every positive thought even has a seed of
a negative thought within it and vice versa, which is why a lot
of greatness in life comes out of suffering. You have to view the
negative before you can aspire to and appreciate the positive.
To me, happiness is not about positive thoughts. It’s not about
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 129

