

them scale. Then, they go into the latest Dropbox or the latest
Airbnb.
The people who were at Google, then joined Facebook when
it was one hundred people, and then joined Stripe when it
was one hundred people?
When Zuckerberg was just starting to scale his company and
panicked, he was like, “I don’t know how to do this.” And he
called Jim Breyer [venture capitalist and founder of Accel
Partners]. And Jim Breyer said, “Well, I have this really great
head of product at this other company, and you need this
person.” Those people tend to do the best, risk-adjusted
over a long period of time, other than the venture investors
themselves. [30]
Some of the most successful people I’ve seen in Silicon Valley
had breakouts very early in their careers. They got promoted
to VP, director, or CEO, or started a company that did well fairly
early. If you’re not getting promoted through the ranks, it gets
a lot harder to catch up later in life. It’s good to be in a smaller
company early because there’s less of an infrastructure to pre-
vent early promotion. [76]
For someone who is early in their career (and maybe even later),
the single most important thing about a company is the alumni
network you’re going to build. Think about who you will work
with and what those people are going on to do. [76]
HOW TO GET LUCKY
Why do you say, “Get rich without getting lucky”?
82 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

In 1,000 parallel universes, you want to be wealthy in 999 of
them. You don’t want to be wealthy in the fifty of them where
you got lucky, so we want to factor luck out of it.
But getting lucky would help, right?
Just recently, Babak Nivi, my co-founder, and I were talking
on Twitter about how one gets lucky, and there are really four
kinds of luck we were talking about.
The first kind of luck is blind luck where one just gets lucky
because something completely out of their control happened.
This includes fortune, fate, etc.
Then, there’s luck through persistence, hard work, hustle, and
motion. This is when you’re running around creating opportu-
nities. You’re generating a lot of energy, you’re doing a lot to stir
things up. It’s almost like mixing a petri dish or mixing a bunch
of reagents and seeing what combines. You’re just generating
enough force, hustle, and energy for luck to find you.
A third way is you become very good at spotting luck. If you
are very skilled in a field, you will notice when a lucky break
happens in your field, and other people who aren’t attuned to
it won’t notice. So, you become sensitive to luck.
The last kind of luck is the weirdest, hardest kind, where you
build a unique character, a unique brand, a unique mindset,
which causes luck to find you.
For example, let’s say you’re the best person in the world
at deep-sea diving. You’re known to take on deep-sea dives
nobody else will even dare to attempt. By sheer luck, somebody
BUILDING WEALTH · 83

NEW PAGE

finds a sunken treasure ship off the coast they can’t get to.
Well, their luck just became your luck, because they’re going
to come to you to get to the treasure, and you’re going to get
paid for it.
This is an extreme example, but it shows how one person had
blind luck finding the treasure. Them coming to you to extract
it and give you half is not blind luck. You created your own luck.
You put yourself in a position to capitalize on luck or to attract
luck when nobody else created the opportunity for themselves.
To get rich without getting lucky, we want to be deterministic.
We don’t want to leave it to chance. [78]
Ways to get lucky:
• Hope luck finds you.
• Hustle until you stumble into it.
• Prepare the mind and be sensitive to chances others miss.
• Become the best at what you do. Refine what you do until
this is true. Opportunity will seek you out. Luck becomes
your destiny.
It starts becoming so deterministic, it stops being luck. The
definition starts fading from luck to destiny. To summarize
the fourth type: build your character in a certain way, then
your character becomes your destiny.
One of the things I think is important to make money is having
a reputation that makes people do deals through you. Remem-
ber the example of being a great diver where treasure hunters
will come and give you a piece of the treasure for your diving
skills.
84 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

