

superpower to control your internal state. The advantage of
meditation is recognizing just how out of control your mind
is. It is like a monkey flinging feces, running around the room,
making trouble, shouting, and breaking things. It’s completely
uncontrollable. It’s an out-of-control madperson.
You have to see this mad creature in operation before you feel a
certain distaste toward it and start separating yourself from it.
In that separation is liberation. You realize, “Oh, I don’t want to
be that person. Why am I so out of control?” Awareness alone
calms you down. [4]
Insight meditation lets you run your brain in debug mode until
you realize you’re just a subroutine in a larger program.
I try to keep an eye on my internal monologue. It doesn’t always
work. In the computer programming sense, I try to run my
brain in “debugging mode” as much as possible. When I’m
talking to someone, or when I’m engaged in a group activity,
it’s almost impossible because your brain has too many things
to handle. If I’m by myself, like just this morning, I’m brushing
my teeth and I start thinking forward to a podcast. I started
going through this little fantasy where I imagined Shane asking
me a bunch of questions and I was fantasy- answering them.
Then, I caught myself. I put my brain in debug mode and just
watched every little instruction go by.
I said, “Why am I fantasy-future planning? Why can’t I just
stand here and brush my teeth?” It’s the awareness my brain
was running off in the future and planning some fantasy sce-
nario out of ego. I was like, “Well, do I really care if I embarrass
SAVING YOURSELF · 175

NEW PAGE

myself? Who cares? I’m going to die anyway. This is all going to
go to zero, and I won’t remember anything, so this is pointless.”
Then, I shut down, and I went back to brushing my teeth. I
was noticing how good the toothbrush was and how good it
felt. Then the next moment, I’m off to thinking something else.
I have to look at my brain again and say, “Do I really need to
solve this problem right now?”
Ninety-five percent of what my brain runs off and tries to do,
I don’t need to tackle in that exact moment. If the brain is like
a muscle, I’ll be better off resting it, being at peace. When a
particular problem arises, I’ll immerse myself in it.
Right now as we’re talking, I’d rather dedicate myself to being
completely lost in the conversation and to being 100 percent
focused on this as opposed to thinking about “Oh, when I
brushed my teeth, did I do it the right way?”
The ability to singularly focus is related to the ability to lose your-
self and be present, happy, and (ironically) more effective. [4]
It’s almost like you’re taking yourself out of a certain frame
and you’re watching things from a different perspective even
though you’re in your own mind.
Buddhists talk about awareness versus the ego. They’re really
talking about how you can think of your brain, your con-
sciousness, as a multilayered mechanism. There’s a core-base,
kernel-level OS running. Then, there are applications running
on top. (I like to think of it as computer and geek speak.)
I’m actually going back to my awareness level of OS, which is
176 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

always calm, always peaceful, and generally happy and con-
tent. I’m trying to stay in awareness mode and not activate
the monkey mind, which is always worried, frightened, and
anxious. It serves incredible purpose, but I try not to activate
the monkey mind until I need it. When I need it, I want to just
focus on that. If I run it 24/7, I waste energy and the monkey
mind becomes me. I am more than my monkey mind.
Another thing: spirituality, religion, Buddhism, or anything
you follow will teach you over time you are more than just your
mind. You are more than just your habits. You are more than
just your preferences. You’re a level of awareness. You’re a body.
Modern humans, we don’t live enough in our bodies. We don’t
live enough in our awareness. We live too much in this internal
monologue in our heads. All of which is just programmed into
you by society and by the environment when you were younger.
You are basically a bunch of DNA that reacted to environmental
effects when you were younger. You recorded the good and bad
experiences, and you use them to prejudge everything thrown
against you. Then you’re using those experiences, constantly
trying and predict and change the future.
As you get older, the sum of preferences you’ve accumulated is
very, very large. These habitual reactions end up as runaway
freight trains controlling your mood. We should control our
own moods. Why don’t we study how to control our moods?
What a masterful thing it would be if you could say, “Right
now I would like to be in the curious state,” and then you can
genuinely get yourself into the curious state. Or say, “I want to
be in a mourning state. I’m mourning a loved one, and I want to
grieve for them. I really want to feel that. I don’t want to be dis-
tracted by a computer programming problem due tomorrow.”
SAVING YOURSELF · 177

