

gal. It’s never worth it to wear an orange jumpsuit. Stay out of
total catastrophic loss. Avoiding ruin could also mean you stay
out of things that could be physically dangerous or hurt your
body. You have to watch your health.
Stay out of things that could cause you to lose all of your capital,
all of your savings. Don’t gamble everything on one go. Instead,
take rationally optimistic bets with big upsides. [78]
EARN WITH YOUR MIND,
NOT YOUR TIME.
GET PAID FOR YOUR JUDGMENT
Choosing what kinds of jobs, careers, or fields you get into and
what sort of deals you’re willing to take from your employer
will give you much more free time. Then, you don’t have to
BUILDING WEALTH · 67

NEW PAGE

worry as much about time management. I would love to be
paid purely for my judgment, not for any work. I want a robot,
capital, or computer to do the work, but I want to be paid for
my judgment. [1]
I think every human should aspire to being knowledgeable
about certain things and being paid for our unique knowl-
edge. We have as much leverage as is possible in our business,
whether it’s through robots or computers or what have you.
Then, we can be masters of our own time because we are just
being tracked on outputs and not inputs.
Imagine someone comes along who demonstrably has slightly
better judgment. They’re right 85 percent of the time instead of
75 percent. You will pay them $50 million, $100 million, $200
million, whatever it takes, because 10 percent better judgment
steering a $100 billion ship is very valuable. CEOs are highly
paid because of their leverage. Small differences in judgment
and capability really get amplified. [2]
Demonstrated judgment—credibility around the judgment—
is so critical. Warren Buffett wins here because he has massive
credibility. He’s been highly accountable. He’s been right over
and over in the public domain. He’s built a reputation for very
high integrity, so you can trust him. People will throw infinite
leverage behind him because of his judgment. Nobody asks
him how hard he works. Nobody asks him when he wakes up
or when he goes to sleep. They’re like, “Warren, just do your
thing.”
Judgment—especially demonstrated judgment, with high
accountability and a clear track record—is critical. [78]
68 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

We waste our time with short-term thinking and busywork.
Warren Buffett spends a year deciding and a day acting.
That act lasts decades.
Just from being marginally better, like running a quarter
mile a fraction of a second faster, some people get paid a lot
more—orders of magnitude more. Leverage magnifies those
differences even more. Being at the extreme in your art is very
important in the age of leverage. [2]
SOLVE VIA ITERATION.
THEN GET PAID VIA REPETITION.
PRIORITIZE AND FOCUS
I’ve encountered plenty of bad luck along the way. The first
little fortune I made I instantly lost in the stock market. The
second little fortune I made, or should have made, I basically
BUILDING WEALTH · 69

