

Once I came to that realization, jealousy faded away because
I don’t want to be anybody else. I’m perfectly happy being me.
By the way, even that is under my control. To be happy being
me. It’s just there are no social rewards for it. [4]
HAPPINESS IS BUILT BY HABITS
My most surprising discovery in the last five years is that peace
and happiness are skills. These are not things you are born
with. Yes, there is a genetic range. And a lot of it is conditioning
from your environment, but you can un-condition and recon-
dition yourself.
You can increase your happiness over time, and it starts with
believing you can do it.
It’s a skill. Just like nutrition is a skill, dieting is a skill, working
out is a skill, making money is a skill, meeting girls and guys is
a skill, having good relationships is a skill, even love is a skill.
It starts with realizing they’re skills you can learn. When you
put your intention and focus on it, the world can become a
better place.
When working, surround yourself with people more
successful than you.
When playing, surround yourself with people happier than
you.
What type of skill is happiness?
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 145

NEW PAGE

It’s all trial and error. You just see what works. You can try
sitting meditation. Did that work for you? Was it Tantra medi-
tation or was it Vipassana meditation? Was it a ten-day retreat
or was twenty minutes enough?
Okay. None of those worked. But what if I tried yoga? What if
I kite-surfed? What if I go car racing? What about cooking?
Does that make me Zen? You literally have to try all of these
things until you find something that works for you.
When it comes to medicines for the mind, the placebo effect is
100 percent effective. When it comes to your mind, you want
to be positively inclined, not incredulous in belief. If it is fully
internal, you should have a positive mindset.
For example, I was reading The Power of Now by Eckhart Tolle,
which is a fantastic introduction to being present, for people
who are not religious. He shows you the single-most import-
ant thing is to be present and hammers it home over and over
again until you get it.
He wrote about this body-energy exercise. You lie down and
you feel the energy moving around your body. At that point, the
old me would have put the book down and said, “Well, that’s
BS.” But the new me said, “Well, if I believe it, maybe it’ll work.”
I went into it with a positive mindset. I laid down and tried the
meditation. You know what? It felt really good.
How does someone build the skill of happiness?
You can build good habits. Not drinking alcohol will keep your
mood more stable. Not eating sugar will keep your mood more
stable. Not going on Facebook, Snapchat, or Twitter will keep
146 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

your mood more stable. Playing video games will make you
happier in the short run—and I used to be an avid gamer—but
in the long run, it could ruin your happiness. You’re being fed
dopamine and having dopamine withdrawn from you in these
little uncontrollable ways. Caffeine is another one where you
trade long term for the short term.
Essentially, you have to go through your life replacing your
thoughtless bad habits with good ones, making a commitment
to be a happier person. At the end of the day, you are a combi-
nation of your habits and the people who you spend the most
time with.
When we’re kids, we have very few habits. Over time, we
learn the things we are not supposed to do. We become self-
conscious. We start forming habits and routines.
Many distinctions between people who get happier as they get
older and people who don’t can be explained by what habits
they have developed. Are they habits that will increase your
long-term happiness rather than your short-term happiness?
Are you surrounding yourself with people who are generally
positive and upbeat people? Are those relationships low-
maintenance? Do you admire and respect but not envy them?
There’s the “five chimps theory” where you can predict a
chimp’s behavior by the five chimps it hangs out with the most.
I think that applies to humans as well. Maybe it’s politically
incorrect to say you should choose your friends very wisely.
But you shouldn’t choose them haphazardly based on who
you live next to or who you happen to work with. The people
who are the most happy and optimistic choose the right five
chimps. [8]
LEARNING HAPPINESS · 147

