

care, and you will do a great job. When you are the agent and
you are doing it on somebody else’s behalf, you can do a bad
job. You just don’t care. You optimize for yourself rather than
for the principal’s assets.
The smaller the company, the more everyone feels like a prin-
cipal. The less you feel like an agent, the better the job you’re
going to do. The more closely you can tie someone’s compensa-
tion to the exact value they’re creating, the more you turn them
into a principal, and the less you turn them into an agent. [12]
I think at a core fundamental level, we understand this. We’re
attracted to principals, and we all bond with principals, but the
media and modern society spend a lot of time brainwashing
you about needing an agent, an agent being important, and the
agent being knowledgeable. [12]
COMPOUND INTEREST
Compound interest—most of you should know it in the finance
context. If you don’t, crack open a microeconomics textbook.
It’s worth reading a microeconomics textbook from start to
finish.
An example of compound interest—let’s say you’re earning 10
percent a year on your $1. The first year, you make 10 percent,
and you end up with $1.10. The next year, you end up with $1.21,
and the next year $1.33. It keeps adding onto itself. If you’re
compounding at 30 percent per year for thirty years, you don’t
just end up with ten or twenty times your money—you end up
with thousands of times your money. [10]
In the intellectual domain, compound interest rules. When
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 109

NEW PAGE

you look at a business with one hundred users growing at
a compound rate of 20 percent per month, it can very, very
quickly stack up to having millions of users. Sometimes, even
the founders of these companies are surprised by how large
the business scales. [10]
BASIC MATH
I think basic mathematics is really underrated. If you’re going
to make money, if you’re going to invest money, your basic
math should be really good. You don’t need to learn geometry,
trigonometry, calculus, or any of the complicated stuff if you’re
just going into business. But you want arithmetic, probability,
and statistics. Those are extremely important. Crack open a
basic math book, and make sure you are really good at mul-
tiplying, dividing, compounding, probability, and statistics.
BLACK SWANS
There’s a new branch of probability statistics, which is really
around tail events. Black swans are extreme probabilities.
Again, I have to refer back to Nassim Taleb, who I think is one
of the greatest philosopher-scientists of our times. He’s really
done a lot of pioneering work on this.
CALCULUS
Calculus is useful to know, to understand the rates of change
and how nature works. But it’s more important to understand
the principles of calculus—where you’re measuring the change
in small discrete or small continuous events. It’s not import-
ant you solve integrals or do derivations on demand, because
you’re not going to need to in the business world.
110 · THE ALMANACK OF NAVAL RAVIKANT

NEW PAGE

FALSIFIABILITY
Least understood, but the most important principle for
anyone claiming “science” on their side—falsifiability. If it
doesn’t make falsifiable predictions, it’s not science. For you
to believe something is true, it should have predictive power,
and it must be falsifiable. [11]
I think macroeconomics, because it doesn’t make falsifiable
predictions (which is the hallmark of science), has become
corrupted. You never have a counterexample when studying
the economy. You can never take the US economy and run two
different experiments at the same time. [4]
IF YOU CAN’T DECIDE, THE ANSWER IS NO.
If I’m faced with a difficult choice, such as:
→ Should I marry this person?
→ Should I take this job?
→ Should I buy this house?
→ Should I move to this city?
→ Should I go into business with this person?
If you cannot decide, the answer is no. And the reason is, modern
society is full of options. There are tons and tons of options. We
live on a planet of seven billion people, and we are connected to
everybody on the internet. There are hundreds of thousands of
careers available to you. There are so many choices.
You’re biologically not built to realize how many choices there
are. Historically, we’ve all evolved in tribes of 150 people. When
someone comes along, they may be your only option for a
partner.
BUILDING JUDGMENT · 111

